Provocative Thinking and Making

Welcome to the School of the Art Institute of Chicago (SAIC), one of the most historically significant accredited independent schools of art and design in the nation located in one of the greatest American cities. Our accolades are many, including recognition by Columbia University’s National Arts Journalism survey as “the most influential art college in the United States” and our consistent ranking among the top three graduate fine arts programs in the nation by U.S. News and World Report.

SAIC is distinct in the way that it provides graduate, post-baccalaureate, and undergraduate students an interdisciplinary curriculum and the necessary freedom to develop as artists, designers, and scholars. At the same time, we strive for a level of rigor, investigation, and cultural relevance that makes SAIC truly special. Our students translate the most complex ideas into tangible forms—paintings, sculptures, films, performances, books, installations, inventions, buildings, community projects, and, more often than not, a combination of the above. Few schools in the United States provide such a broad range of possibilities.

Our engaged student body and award-winning faculty of artists, scholars, and leading practitioners work in close proximity, sharing exceptional resources and establishing a forum for a vigorous exchange of ideas. The heralded new Modern Wing of the Art Institute provides an incredible resource for inspiration and study. Other unique SAIC resources include our cutting-edge facilities, Gene Siskel Film Center, Visiting Artists Program, and Sullivan Galleries that exhibit work to a wide audience.

Of course, downtown Chicago gives our students access to one of the world’s most creatively vibrant and architecturally rich cities, and we encourage engagement in its full spectrum of cultural amenities. However, we fully recognize that we live in a globalized society—reflected also in the demographic make-up of our student body—and thus provide a wealth of invaluable international study opportunities across the globe.

Foremost, SAIC is about students. We are dedicated to providing a complete liberal arts as well as the arts and design education that will serve our alumni throughout their multifaceted careers. We are delighted by your interest and sincerely hope that you will add your voice to the SAIC dialogue at such a critical point in the history of Chicago, the nation, and the world.

About SAIC

A leader in educating artists, designers, and scholars since 1866, the School of the Art Institute of Chicago (SAIC) offers nationally accredited undergraduate, graduate, and post-baccalaureate programs to more than 3,500 students from around the globe. Located in the heart of Chicago, SAIC has an educational philosophy built upon an interdisciplinary approach to art and design, giving students unparalleled opportunities to develop their creative and critical abilities, while working with renowned faculty who include many of the leading practitioners in their fields.

SAIC is one of the oldest accredited independent schools of art and design in the country.

Founded as the Chicago Academy of Design in 1866, the School of the Art Institute of Chicago (SAIC) provides a challenging education in the studio arts and exhibition opportunities for its students. The school incorporated as the Chicago Academy of Fine Art in 1879, and changed its name to the Art Institute of Chicago in 1882. The museum and school moved into a building designed and built for the World's Columbian Exposition in 1893.

Throughout the history of SAIC, alumni have played central roles in important art movements. It was SAIC that provided the impetus for two significant schools of American painting—the Regionalists of the 1930s, and the Imagists of the 1960s. Some of the most notable names in the arts received their early training at SAIC, including Georgia O’Keeffe, Claes Oldenburg, H.C. Westermann, Thomas Hart Benton, Grant Wood, Ivan Albright, Ed Paschke, Roger Brown, Halston, LeRoy Neiman, Elizabeth Murray, Cynthia Rowley, David Sedaris, Rirkrit Tiravanija, and Sarah Vowell.

SAIC has the largest school-museum campus in the United States.

Since 1976, SAIC has occupied its own cutting-edge facilities adjoining the museum and the heralded Modern Wing overlooking Grant Park and Lake Michigan with additional buildings throughout an urban campus at the heart of the Chicago Loop.

SAIC Today: Art and Design in the 21st Century

The School of the Art Institute of Chicago is one of the largest accredited independent schools of art and design in the country. Providing degrees at the undergraduate, post-baccalaureate, and graduate levels, SAIC offers a broad and dynamic spectrum of study, including Art and Technology Studies; Arts Administration and Policy; Art History, Theory, and Criticism; Art Education and Art Therapy; Fashion Design; Film, Video, New Media, and Animation; Architecture, Historic Preservation, and Interior Architecture; Ceramics; Fiber and Material Studies; Painting and Drawing; Performance; Photography; Printmaking; Sculpture; Sound; Visual Communication; Visual and Critical Studies; and Writing. A comprehensive program in Liberal Arts emphasizes the critical role that humanities, mathematics, and sciences play in artists' development.

Founded in 1877, Rhode Island School of Design (or “RIZ-dee” for the acronym RISD) is one of the oldest and best-known colleges of art and design in the U.S. Each year approximately 2,300 students from around the world pursue a creative, studio-based education at RISD, which offers rigorous bachelor’s and master’s degree programs in 19 architecture, design, fine arts and art education majors. The college is located in Providence, Rhode Island, which offers its own vibrant art scene and is conveniently located between two other major cultural centers: Boston and New York.

From its incorporation on March 22, 1877, Rhode Island School of Design has stood out as a leader in art and design education, attracting extraordinary people who thrive in its creative culture. As one of the first colleges of its kind in the country – founded simultaneously with the RISD Museum of Art – it has always been something of a maverick.

RISD was founded and nurtured by women – more than 40 years before women in America even gained the right to vote. In 1877, the 34 members of the Rhode Island Women’s Centennial Commission voted to invest their group’s surplus funding of $1,675 in founding Rhode Island School of Design. In doing so, they not only embarked on a radical experiment, but set the school's tone for challenging assumptions that continues to this day.

The mission of Rhode Island School of Design, through its college and museum, is to educate its students and the public in the creation and appreciation of works of art and design, to discover and transmit knowledge and to make lasting contributions to a global society through critical thinking, scholarship and innovation.

Original Mission Statement

On March 22, 1877, the Rhode Island General Assembly ratified “An Act to Incorporate the Rhode Island School of Design.” The corporation, comprised of a forward-thinking group of men and women, artists and business leaders, educators and politicians, was formed “for the purpose of aiding in the cultivation of the arts of design.” The original bylaws set forth the following key objectives for RISD:

First. The instruction of artisans in drawing, painting, modeling, and designing, that they may successfully apply the principles of Art to the requirements of trade and manufacture.

Second. The systematic training of students in the practice of Art, in order that they may understand its principles, give instruction to others, or become artists.

Third. The general advancement of public Art Education, by the exhibition of works of Art and of Art school studies, and by lectures on Art.

RISD recognizes diversity and inclusivity as fundamental to a creative community and integral to an art and design education. Just as the studio environment fosters curiosity, flexibility, empathy, imagination and progressive thinking, these are values the RISD community shares across the board. As a global community, RISD strives to:

• create and sustain inclusive perspectives and practices
• embrace and celebrate differences in its campus community
• attract, develop and retain a diverse population of students, faculty and staff
• engage with our ever-changing communities in meaningful ways

Ranked as America’s top college for students in the arts by Newsweek/The Daily Beast, California Institute of the Arts has set the pace for educating professional artists since 1970.

Offering rigorous undergraduate and graduate degree programs through six schools—Art, Critical Studies, Dance, Film/Video, Music, and Theater—CalArts has championed creative excellence, critical reflection, and the development of new forms and expressions.

As successive generations of faculty and alumni have helped shape the landscape of contemporary arts, the Institute first envisioned by Walt Disney encompasses a vibrant, eclectic community with global reach, inviting experimentation, independent inquiry, and active collaboration and exchange among artists, artistic disciplines and cultural traditions.

Admission to CalArts is competitive and considered mainly on the basis of demonstrated artistic merit, as assessed by the faculty of the individual programs. Other important considerations include educational records, recommendations, and artist’s statements by applicants.

Based in Valencia, north of Los Angeles, CalArts further extends its commitment to the arts through the Roy and Edna Disney/CalArts Theater (REDCAT) in downtown L.A. and the nationally emulated Community Arts Partnership (CAP) youth arts program.

CalArts teaches artists to develop the skills and personal drive to reach their creative potential, question received ideas and expand forms of knowledge and experience in the world. CalArts challenges artists to create work that matters globally to the state of culture today and in the future.

California Institute of the Arts was founded with the intent to bring different art forms together and allow them to cross-pollinate, in the process fostering collaboration and sparking innovation.

As an internationally recognized school for the performing and visual arts—film, theater, art, dance, music and writing—the CalArts artistic philosophy places an emphasis on an exploration of new paths beyond conventional boundaries.

The CalArts educational philosophy is based on close collegial interaction between teachers and students—in class, in production and in one-to-one mentoring. This approach combines rigorous instruction with individualized attention, a process that empowers students to define their own personal objectives—and to develop and refine their own distinctive artistic voices. Given more creative freedom than at traditional art schools and conservatories, our students, in turn, are self-motivated, passionate, and deeply committed to their work. They are accepted into CalArts primarily on the basis of their artistic ability; once here, they produce art from day one.

Today CalArts comprises three entities. First, is the educational and artistic program on campus. The second is REDCAT, our producing, presenting and exhibiting venue in downtown Los Angeles. The theater and gallery at REDCAT bring an eclectic mix of artists from throughout the world to Los Angeles. This state-of-the-art venue also features work by faculty and alumni. And third is CalArts’ Community Arts Partnership (CAP), a network of collaborative partnerships that links the Institute with more than 40 arts organizations in order to provide arts education to youth throughout greater Los Angeles. Teaching in CAP programs offers students the opportunity to acquire valuable teaching experience, to earn income, and to make a significant contribution to the lives of others.

CalArts is committed to providing a well-rounded education for students.
Careers in the Arts

Recent studies have shown the impact that the arts have in society and in developing the creative economy. For further reading:

• The Strategic National Arts Alumni Project (SNAAP), an annual online survey, data management and institutional improvement system that enhances the impact of arts-school education.
• An Otis Report on the Creative Economy of the Los Angeles Region

Courses

Through our Curating Your Own Life: Transitioning to a Career after CalArts program, students are exposed to a range of careers in the arts; opportunities to participate in career-related courses and internships; consultations with guest artists to gain familiarity with entrepreneurial approaches to their own work; and a Third Year Experience featuring career mentoring for all students. Our goal is to provide students with the tools to shape a career that fits their individual talents and ambitions.

• Arts Pedagogy: Artists Preparing to Teach in the Community
• Real World Survival Skills
• Getting Your Art Life Together (life after art school) (School of Art)
• NEXT! - Preparing for My Future in Dance (School of Dance)
• The Business of Film (School of Film/Video)
• Producing Your Thesis (School of Film/Video)
• Entrepreneurial Studies (School of Film/Video)
• Career Design for Musicians (School of Music)
• Adventures in Commissioning (School of Music)
• Entrepreneurship (School of Theater)
• The Law of Producing Theater (School of Theater)
• Arts Marketing and Grant Writing (School of Theater)

January interim courses provide students from most Schools with an array of compressed learning opportunities, including career-oriented workshops, practicums and international experiences.
Other Opportunities

• Internship opportunities are posted in the Internship Bank with a wide range of employers including artists, film studios, galleries, theaters, non-profit organizations, design studios and schools.
• National organizations such as Teach for America and National Association of Artist Organizations engage students, faculty, and staff. The Kauffman Foundation supported Entrepreneurship in the Arts conference was held at CalArts in 2007.
• Extensive visiting artist program includes a new series exploring topics around the theme “Thinking Small and the Economy of Being an Artist.” Alpert award-winning artists regularly participate as guest artists in schools and at REDCAT.
• During the school year, the Office of Student Affairs invites companies for on-campus presentations and recruiting. The Office also hosts workshops throughout the year that focus on resume and cover letter writing, legal issues in art, teaching, grant writing, budgeting and credit, tax preparation and time management.
• The Alumni Association presents casual lunchtime discussions with alumni in career-focused sessions, in addition to workshops on developing business skills applicable to the arts.
• International opportunities include academic and performance partnerships with organizations worldwide, including: Slade School of Art in London, Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama in Glasgow, Fringe Edinburgh Festival, Maison de la France and the Cultural Services of the French Consulate in Los Angeles, theater projects in Rwanda and Uganda, and Center for New Performance productions in England, France and Australia.

More information on career resources offered by the Student Affairs Office

The School of Art offers professional instruction in four interrelated areas of study: graphic design, painting/printmaking, photography, and sculpture.

Artists and designers of unusual promise and strong motivation are provided an educational context in which they can explore the potential of their own talents in the midst of an intense critical dialogue. This dialogue is generated by their peers, by distinguished visitors, and by a faculty comprised of professional artists of acknowledged accomplishment.

The graduate student’s primary educational experience at Yale is centered on his or her own studio activity. Supporting this enterprise are the experience, knowledge, and skills gained from rigorous, structured courses such as drawing, filmmaking, the relativity of color, and the rich academic offerings found throughout Yale. Each student is routinely exposed to many aesthetic positions through encounters with faculty members and visitors. The School is devoted not only to the refinement of visual skills, but to the cultivation of the mind. Students must bring creative force and imagination to their own development, for these qualities cannot be taught—they can only be stimulated and appreciated.

The School of Art offers an undergraduate art major for students in Yale College (see the bulletin Yale College Programs of Study). In addition, the School’s courses are open to students in the Graduate School and other professional schools of the University, and School of Art students may enroll in elective courses in the Graduate School and other professional schools as well as in the College with permission.

Master of Fine Arts Degree

The degree of Master of Fine Arts is the only degree offered by the School of Art. It is conferred by the University upon recommendation of the faculty after successful completion of all course work in residence and after a thesis presentation that has been approved by the faculty. It implies distinctive achievement on the part of students in studies in the professional area of their choice and demonstrated capacity for independent work. The minimum residence requirement is two years. All candidates’ work is reviewed by faculty at the end of each term. If the work is not considered satisfactory, the student may not be invited back to complete the program (see section on Review and Awards under Academic Regulations). All degree candidates are expected to be present at the Commencement exercises in May unless excused by the dean.

Course work for the Master of Fine Arts degree carries a minimum of sixty credits. The disposition of these credits varies according to the area of study and is agreed upon at the time of registration between the student and his or her faculty adviser.

Lecture Program

Each department has its own visitors program in which professionals from outside the School are invited to lecture or take part in critiques. There is also an all-school lecture program in which ideas of general and cross-disciplinary importance are explored by visiting artists and members of the faculty.

Exhibitions

The School of Art’s Green Gallery, located at 1156 Chapel Street, provides a year-round forum for the exhibition of work by students, faculty, and special guests in the four graduate departments of the School and the undergraduate program. The gallery is usually open to the public daily from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. Information: 203.432.2605.

HISTORY OF THE SCHOOL

The study of the visual arts at Yale had its beginning with the opening, in 1832, of the Trumbull Gallery, one of the earliest art museums in the Anglo-Saxon world and the first (and long the only one) connected with a college in this country. It was founded by patriot-artist Colonel John Trumbull, one-time aide-de-camp to General Washington, with the help of Professor Benjamin Silliman, the celebrated scientist. A singularly successful art exhibition held in 1858 under the direction of the College Librarian, Daniel Coit Gilman, led to the establishment of an art school in 1864, through the generosity of Augustus Russell Street, a native of New Haven and graduate of Yale’s Class of 1812. This new educational program was placed in the hands of an art council, one of whose members was the painter-inventor Samuel F. B. Morse, a graduate of Yale College. When the Yale School of the Fine Arts opened in 1869, it was the first art school connected with an institution of higher learning in the country, and classes in drawing, painting, sculpture, and art history were inaugurated. The art collections in the old Trumbull Gallery were moved into a building endowed by Augustus Street and so named Street Hall, and were greatly augmented by the acquisition of the Jarves Collection of early Italian paintings in 1871.

Architectural instruction was begun in 1908 and was established as a department in 1916 with Everett Victor Meeks at its head. Drama, under the direction of George Pierce Baker and with its own separate building, was added in 1925 and continued to function as a department of the School until it became an independent school in 1955. In 1928 a new art gallery was opened, built by Egerton Swartwout and funded through the generosity of Edward S. Harkness. It was connected to Street Hall by a bridge above High Street, and Street Hall was used for instruction in art. The program in architecture was moved to Weir Hall, designed by George Douglas Miller. A large addition to the Art Gallery, designed by Louis I. Kahn in collaboration with Douglas Orr, and funded by the family of James Alexander Campbell and other friends of the arts at Yale, was opened in 1953. Several ﬂoors were used by the School until the rapidly expanding Gallery collections required their use. In 1959 the School of Art and Architecture was made a fully graduate professional school. In 1963 the Art and Architecture Building, designed by Paul Rudolph, was opened, funded by many friends of the arts at Yale under the chairmanship of Ward Cheney. In 1969 the School was constituted as two faculties, each with its own dean; and in 1972 two separate schools were established by the President and Fellows, the School of Art and the School of Architecture, which until 2000 shared the Rudolph building (now Rudolph Hall) for most of their activities. Sculpture was housed at 14 Mansfield Street in Hammond Hall (a large building formerly used for mechanical engineering), graphic design was located at 212 York Street (an old Yale fraternity building), and at 215 Park Street there were classrooms and additional graduate painting studios. Street Hall was assigned to the University Department of the History of Art. The arts at Yale—architecture, art, the Art Gallery, the Center for British Art, the history of art, the School of Drama, and the Repertory Theatre—thus occupied a group of buildings stretching along and near Chapel Street for almost three blocks.

It had long been the University’s plan to extend the Arts Area schools farther up Chapel Street. The first major new construction under this plan was the renovation of 1156 Chapel Street with the addition of an adjoining building at 353 Crown Street, designed by Deborah Berke, which opened in September 2000. A generous gift by Yale College graduate Holcombe T. Green, Jr., for whom the building is named, and a major contribution by Marion Rand in memory of her husband, Paul Rand, professor of graphic design, made this new complex possible. The new art buildings house an experimental theater for the School of Drama and all departments of the School of Art except sculpture. In 2009 sculpture moved from Hammond Hall, where it was housed from 1973 to 2008, to a new building in the Arts Area at 36 Edgewood Avenue adjacent to a new School of Art gallery at 32 Edgewood Avenue, both designed by Kieran Timberlake.

The Department of Art is committed to a professional art training within the context of a liberal arts university. Visual artists are responsible for some of the most provocative and enduring expressions of culture. At UCLA, emerging artists are provided with the tools they need to express themselves in ways that are meaningful in the social context in which they live and work.

The department attracts gifted and motivated students who thrive in an environment that encourages autonomy. They are drawn not only to the outstanding creative faculty, the University's resources, and its location in one of the world's leading art centers, but also to a program that encourages them to develop as artists. The result is a distinguished list of graduates who have made significant contributions in their field.

Undergraduate Studies (BA, Art)

The Department of Art is committed to professional art training within the context of a research university. Headed by a faculty of internationally recognized artists and theoreticians and complemented by a roster of distinguished visiting lecturers, the department provides a strong grounding in the principal art traditions and in the visual language of contemporary studio practice.

The department provides students with a broad exposure to the arts and encourages new fields of investigation. Students work in more than one medium and explore mixed media possibilities as well. Through the program, students can discover the best way – painting, video, photography, sculpture, ceramics, etc. – to express their ideas.

Students drawn to this department are interested in developing and refining their approach to the making and doing of art. The intent of the program is to provide the framework, both through coursework and independent study, to assist each student in the development of his or her own body of work.

The department offers courses in painting and drawing, photography, sculpture, ceramics, art theory, and new genres (including performance art, video, installation, and nonstudio work).

All majors are required to take foundation courses in the areas listed above, followed by more advanced courses selected from these areas. Typically, studio courses have a limited enrollment of approximately 17 students per section in order to provide ample interaction between students and faculty. Please refer to links below for a complete list of Department, School, and University degree requirements.

The program also stresses the integration of studio work with an inquiry into historical and scholarly aspects of the visual arts. This interchange allows for a dynamic dialogue between faculty and students and provides a context in which students can gain a deeper understanding of the arts today.

The faculty is composed of leading professional artists who have exhibited internationally as well as in important galleries and museums in Los Angeles and New York. The faculty share a passion for teaching as well as for preparing and encouraging future generations of artists.

Museums associated with UCLA offer students the opportunity to participate in innovative interdisciplinary programs and view exhibitions throughout the year. In addition, there are opportunities for students to exhibit their work, highlighted by the Undergraduate Juried Exhibition at the New Wight Gallery.

Graduate Studies

Headed by a faculty of internationally recognized artists and complemented by a roster of distinguished visiting lecturers, the Department of Art at UCLA is committed to professional art training within the context of a great liberal arts university. Within each area of specialization, encouragement is given to explore a wide range of media. Students choose from a diverse group of electives and can take classes in other departments within and outside the School of the Arts and Architecture. Regular interaction between the studio and the classroom creates a close-knit intellectual community that furthers critical thinking and creative growth.

All of the department's courses aim to instill an understanding of and appreciation for the visual arts and their contributions to the history of cultural development and change. Current critical and theoretical thought is the focus of the Seminar in Art (Art C280), and a wide range of contemporary issues is addressed in the Visiting Artists Lecture Series. The low faculty-student ratio facilitates regular one-on-one instruction. In addition, group critique and peer review are integral components of the program.

The department attracts gifted and motivated students who thrive in an environment that encourages autonomy. They are drawn not only to the outstanding creative faculty, the University's resources, and its location in one of the world's leading art centers, but also to a program that encourages them to develop as artists in ways that are meaningful in the social context in which they live and work. The result is a distinguished alumni roster including artists who have made significant contributions in their fields.

Master of Fine Arts (MFA)

The MFA program offers six areas of specialization: Ceramics, Interdisciplinary Studio, New Genres, Painting and Drawing, Photography, and Sculpture. These studio areas are supplemented by seminars and lectures in contemporary critical theory. The program emphasizes the development of a sustained artistic practice through exploration, experimentation, and intensive studio work and study. Opportunities to investigate areas beyond one's concentration are made available.

Maximum time is allowed for independent studio work, enabling students to work with up to three faculty members each quarter on an individual basis. Reviews of graduate work in the winter and spring quarters serve as a forum for critique and discussion with the entire faculty. The MFA degree normally requires two to three years of residency and culminates in a graduate exhibition.

MFA Course Overview

The MFA degree requires a minimum of 72 quarter units of coursework, which typically takes six to nine quarters to complete. Students complete a minimum of 24 of the 72 required units in their field of specialization. Required courses include graduate level studio courses, Graduate Group Critique (276), and the Seminar in Art (C280). A minimum of 12 quarter units of art history and an additional 28 quarter units of art history, or history, theory and criticism coursework offered by related departments in undergraduate and/or graduate studies are also required (including Art C280). Art history, theory or criticism courses completed at the undergraduate level may be applied toward the "art history" requirement, but may not be applied toward the 72 units required for the graduate degree. Students with few or no art history courses in undergraduate study may take upper division or graduate coursework at UCLA as electives to be counted toward the 40-unit "art history" requirement and toward the total units required for the degree. Subjects related to the special interests of the student may be substituted by petition.

In addition to the completion of required coursework, each degree is awarded on the basis of the quality of the student's work as demonstrated in the exhibition which is part of the comprehensive examination. The examination, administered by a faculty committee, includes a review of work completed for the formal exhibition, a document of vita, photo records of works, and a statement of the artist. The document is retained as property of the University.

For course information, please consult the UCLA General Catalog. For a complete outline of degree requirements, see Program Requirements for UCLA Graduate Degrees on the Graduate Division Web site at www.grad.ucla.edu.

We’re ranked first in the country as a public university art school — and fourth in the country overall. That means you’ll graduate with credibility as an artist and a professional, with a degree that’s respected in the world of galleries, design and advertising firms, graduate schools, artistic directors and employers.

We believe that when shopping for an art school, it’s imperative to know which are accredited and by whom. VCUarts is fully accredited.

Accreditation ensures that academic programs provided by institutions of higher education meet acceptable levels of quality. Accrediting associations develop rigorous evaluation criteria and conduct peer reviews on a regular basis.

VCU School of the Arts is accredited by:

• National Association of Schools of Art and Design
• National Association of Schools of Dance
• National Association of Schools of Music
• National Association of Schools of Theatre
• Virginia Department of Education
• Council for Interior Design Accreditation
• National Council for Accreditation for Teacher Education
• Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges

The VCUarts Department of Painting + Printmaking is a vibrant community of artists, scholars, and students — informed by a practice of studio work and research with strong emphasis in critical and creative thinking. The department is large and diverse, with academic programming designed to impart intelligence and build student’s confidence in their discipline.

To artists working in this century, engaging in our academic studio program in painting + printmaking is akin to entering a workman-like laboratory to investigate and re-define visual culture. We welcome you to join us — to bring your intelligence, ambition, and can-do discipline — as we examine our historical precedents, and challenge the future of studio practice.

The Graphic Design Program offers a 122-credit Bachelor of Fine Arts degree in Graphic Design. After completing the Art Foundation Program, students take courses in Publication and Print Design, Sequential and Motion Design, and Interaction Design along with a series of related Studio and Seminar courses.

The primary goal of the curriculum is to educate students to be capable of integrating form and information for the purposes of effective visual communication.

The Department of Graphic Design encourages the exploration of diverse problem-solving methodologies, innovative investigations and creative research in all forms of communication. It is dedicated to excellence in teaching, scholarship, research and professional practice.

The Department provides both an undergraduate and graduate education stressing critical creative and intellectual thinking; awareness of individual, social and cultural issues; the integration of a range of technologies; and a concern for ethical development.

The program actively contributes to the school, university, local, state, national and international communities through its scholarly and creative activities, educational programs and service efforts.

Our department aims to facilitate a comprehensive artistic, technical and intellectual understanding and use of the mediums of photography and film; to provide a rigorous education in the arts, specifically in photographic and moving image media, and a broad education in other academic subjects; to foster a climate that inspires creativity, intellectual curiosity, freedom of expression, and critical thinking.   We emphasize hands-on experience in the fields of fine art, studio and location photography, and narrative, documentary and experimental filmmaking and sponsor a wide variety of guest lectures, seminars and workshops.  All students become adept in chemical based processes and the latest digital technologies.

INTERNSHIPS, RESEARCH GRANTS AND TRAVEL OPPORTUNITIES

Students take many internships that have included advertising and branding firms like the Martin Agency and the Frontier Projects ;  publishing companies  line Time Inc and The National Geographic , television channels like Discovery, museums like the VMFA and MASS Moca, and many art galleries, commercial photographers, videographers and production companies.  Each year many of our students are awarded  School of Arts Undergraduate Student Research Grants which encourages interdisciplinary work within the whole University. The School of Arts offers International Travel Grants, which many Photo and Film students attain every year. We have a direct exchange program with Edinburgh Napier University in Scotland.

ADMISSION CRITERIA AND DEGREE REQUIREMENTS

Admission criteria

Students seeking admission to the Bachelor of Fine Arts in Photography and Film degree program apply to the School of the Arts and enter the Art Foundation Program. During the final semester of the Art Foundation Program, students submit a portfolio application that is reviewed by the Department of Photography and Film.

Degree requirements

Completion of the program requires a minimum of 120 credits. Forty-five credits must be completed in 300-, 400- and/or 500-level courses. The final 30 credits must be completed at VCU. Students are strongly encouraged to meet with an adviser each semester to maintain the correct curriculum track toward graduation.

For full application consideration, students must complete each course requirement of the Art Foundation Program with a minimum grade of C and have a minimum cumulative GPA of 2.0. While in the program students must earn a minimum grade of C in each departmental course and maintain a minimum cumulative GPA of 2.0. Students who fail to meet these requirements may be dropped from the program.

The BFA program in Sculpture + Extended Media offers a fluid and dynamic educational experience that reflects the vital landscape of art making today. Our program is initiated with a progressive cycle of classes, originating with manual and intellectual skill development, and arcing toward the ultimate goal of developing a complex, nuanced and individual approach to art upon graduation. A day-to-day, experimental, and process-orientated studio ethic is encouraged. Fundamental questions of “why,” whether personal, philosophical or conceptual in nature, are buttressed by hands-on strategies facilitating “how.” Using this approach, students flourish in an environment of personal agency and growth, where challenges are celebrated, skill-development encouraged, and conversations open new paths forward.

Even as Sculpture + Extended Media fosters an open and speculative approach to what sculpture can be and do, it is also an intensely useful and practical way of thinking. This is evidenced not just in the transferable skill-sets that develop, but also in the conceptual exploration of materials, objects, images, actions, ecologies, events and politics. In this way, Sculpture + Extended Media occupies a crucial position in between disciplines and areas of thought. Our program culminates by providing students the tools needed to become active participants in the dialogues of our time.

About the School of Art at Carnegie Mellon
The School of Art is a premier location for the interface between art and technology and for interdisciplinary art practice.

The art degree programs and environment are designed to develop individuals capable of working as artists in a complex, rapidly changing global culture. Connections with other CMU departments and research units enhance the creative and academic opportunities available to art students.

Art faculty, all practicing artists or scholars, provide an intense, professional learning environment where students enjoy close ties with their instructors and each other.

Students, faculty and staff contribute regularly to CMU and Pittsburgh's creative communities. Places to see and exhibit art on campus, throughout the city and surrounding neighborhoods are varied and plentiful.

The School of Art:

• Combines the advantages of a renowned studio program with the interdisciplinary resources of a top tier university.
• Offers breadth and depth through an inclusive approach toward educating artists.
• Encourages experimentation, crossing boundaries, and hybrid processes as well as engaging the history and traditions of art.
• Fosters problem solving skills and the ability to work creatively in a complex, rapidly changing global culture.
• Provides versatile training from a professionally active faculty who focus on students as individuals.
• Provides 24-hour access to state-of-the-art facilities in a safe, supportive environment.
• Ensures broad and balanced exposure to a wide range of media, embracing new and established technologies.
• Engages intentionally with local and international communities through courses, events, internships, and study abroad.
• Cultivates and celebrates diversity in educating artists for the future.
• Contributes to a city and region with countless cultural and recreational opportunities.
• Offers career guidance preparing alumni to negotiate their way successfully in the world with creativity and intelligence.

Educational mission:

To provide an environment for learning and creating, which develops in the individual student the knowledge, skills and commitment necessary to work as an artist in society.

Artistic Mission:

To expand the multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary practice of art by striving to inform it with knowledge from the culture-at-large; and to cultivate a broad-spectrum approach to artistic possibilities, which respects tradition and encourages innovation.

Social Mission:

To provide the world with diverse, inquisitive and informed artists who use artmaking in a variety of ways to create a meaningful relationship with society, which sustains the relevance of art locally, nationally, and internationally.

The School of Art's Artistic and Teaching Philosophy:

• Considers, in practical and visionary terms, the role of art and the artist in society.
• Encourages experimentation, crossing boundaries, and hybrid processes as well as engaging the history and traditions of art.
• Combines the advantages of a renowned and innovative professional studio program with the interdisciplinary resources of a top tier university.
• Offers an expansive and inclusive approach toward educating artists, embracing new and established technologies in material and virtual realms.
• Provides extensive training and state-of-the-art facilities in a supportive environment with a professionally active faculty who focus on students as individuals.
• Engages with local and international communities through events, courses, internships, and study abroad.
• Resides in and contributes to a city and region with countless cultural and recreational opportunities.
• Cultivates and celebrates diversity in educating artists for the future.
• Shares and promotes the accomplishments of faculty, students, alumni and guests as they contribute to our culture with creativity and intelligence.

Upon graduating from Carnegie Mellon School of Art, students will be able to:

• Demonstrate creativity, experimentation and invention in the development and realization of artwork
• Utilize technical skills appropriate to their chosen discipline• medium or media
• Apply quantitative, critical and analytical reasoning in relation to processes, materials and forms
• Conduct and apply critical and contextual research in terms of historical and contemporary theoretical, social and cultural issues
• Effectively communicate in visual, written and oral forms
• Employ professional and organizational skills to work independently or collaboratively within a specific discipline or in an interdisciplinary context

The Visual Arts Program attracts emerging artists of unusual promise from around the world. They join a vigorous community, working alongside an exceptional faculty at a world-renowned research institution in New York City, the center of the art world.

Contemporary art has become increasingly interdisciplinary. To that end, the Visual Arts Program offers an MFA degree in Visual Arts rather than in one specific medium. The two-year studio program, taught by internationally celebrated artists, allows students to pursue digital media, drawing, painting, photography, printmaking, sculpture, installation, performance and video art.

The Visual Arts Program offers students many opportunities to expand the depth and complexity of their studio practice as well as their ability to think critically in the context of contemporary art theory. To that end, students have regular studio visits by full and adjunct faculty members, who offer critical insight into the form of, and underlying ideas behind, their work.

Students are also encouraged to take electives outside of the Visual Arts Program: in the Writing, Theatre Arts, and Film programs of the School of the Arts; and in art history, architecture, philosophy and other areas of study throughout Columbia University. These electives ensure that students develop a broad base of art history and theory upon which they can build a solid and provocative studio practice.

Course Descriptions

Graduate Studio
Every Monday evening students have one 40-minute studio visit with full time faculty or other special graduate adjunct faculty. Students usually see each faculty member twice per semester.

Visiting Critic
Each semester the program invites 10-12 visiting artists and critics to do studio visits. Students submit requests for visits, and will see 2 or 3 visiting artists and critics over the semester.

Visiting Artist Lecture Series (VALS)
VALS is organized by a small team of second year MFA students. The VALS coordinators are responsible for soliciting a wish-list of visiting artists from students in the program. The coordinators then arrange a full program of artists’ lectures for Tuesday evenings. Recent presenters include Marina Abramovic, Amanda Alfieri, David Altmejd, Ayreen Anastas, Lothar Baumgarten, Gina Beavers, Zoe Beloff, Jonathon Berger, Sebastian Black, Daniel Bozhkov, Matthew Brannon, Kerstin Bratsch, Connie Butler, David Byrne, Paul Chan, Cora Cohen, Trisha Donnelly, Nicole Eisenman, Okwui Enwezor, Omer Fast, Rochelle Feinstein, Coco Fusco, Rene Gabri, Chitra Ganesh, Lia Gangitano, Andrea Geyer, Paul Graham, Amy Granat, Nicolas Guagnini, Fritz Haeg, Sharon Hayes, Nancy Holt, Alex Hubbard, Anthony Huberman, Pierre Huyghe, Tim Hyde, Arthur Jafa, Joan Jonas, Ella Kruglyanskaya, Michelle Kuo, Elad Lassry, Jose Lerma, Sam Lewitt, Justin Lieberman, Glenn Ligon, Kalup Linzy, Sharon Lockhart, Charles Long, Mary Ellen Mark, Nick Mauss, Keith Mayerson, Josiah McElheny, Shana Moulton, Laura Mulvey, Laurel Nakadate, Molly Nesbit, Bob Nickas, Yoko Ono, Gabriel Orozco, Trevor Paglen, Mai-Thu Perret, Lari Pittman, Genesis P-Orridge, Yvonne Rainer, Scott Rothkopf, Mika Rottenberg, Tom Sachs, Aki Sasamoto, Jacolby Satterwhite, Pieter Schoolwerth, Taryn Simon, Alexandre Singh, Michael Smith, A.L. Steiner, Amber Hawk Swanson, Mika Tajima, Cheyney Thompson, Wolfgang Tillmans, Nicola Tyson, Nick van Woert, Philippe Vergne, Charline Von Heyl, Antek Walczak, Kelley Walker, Jordan Wolfson, and Andrea Zittel.

Critical Issues
Critical Issues is intended as a stimulus to art-making and helps to form the critical and conceptual foundation for students to bring to their studio practice. In the fall, Critical Issues is a lecture series where professors from across the University present on their specialization. In the spring, Critical Issues is a seminar with weekly readings and other required assignments.  Recent lecturers include Alex Alberro, Arnold Aronson, Carol Becker, David Carrier, Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, Jonathan Crary, Wade Davis, Aaron Fox, Jane Gaines, Elizabeth Grosz, Siri Hustvedt, Tom Kalin, Laura Kurgan, Reinhold Martin, John Pemberton, Dr Oliver Sacks, Mira Schor, Kaja Silverman, Jovana Stokic, Michael Taussig, Mark Taylor, and Lance Weiler.

Group Critique
Students meet in small groups of 6-8 students with an instructor for three consecutive Wednesdays. Over the three week sequence each student has a critique with the group.

Electives
Students may choose courses from anywhere in the University, subject to the course’s registration requirements. Students are required to take four elective courses total, or one elective each semester.

Mentor Program
Each student is assigned to two mentor groups which meet every semester. Groups are usually 10-12 students. Mentors schedule individual studio visits, group visits, lectures, field trips, workshops, etc. for one full week of the semester.  Current mentors include A.K. Burns, Mark Dion, David Humphrey, Michael Joo, Josiah McElheny, Matthew Ritchie, and Rona Yefman.

The Herman and Eve Gelman Studio Visit Series
In this ongoing program supported by a generous grant, celebrated New York artists open their studios to a small group of graduate students to observe and discuss works-in-progress. Past participants have included Vince Aletti, Mamma Andersson, Dave Arnold, Huma Bhabha, Elinor Carucci, Paul Chan, Luis Gispert, Barbara Hammer, David Hoey, Jacqueline Humphries, James Hyde, Robert Lazzarini, An-My Le, Robert Longo, Vera Lutter, Lorraine O’Grady, Gilles Peress, Cai Quoqiang, Patricia Sharon Chang, Michael Spano, Sara Vanderbeek, Stanley Whitney, Sasha Wolf and Lisa Yuskavage.

Public Exhibitions

First-Year Exhibition
The first year of study culminates in an exhibition that is curated by an outside curator and is mounted in the Miriam and Ira D. Wallach Gallery in Schermerhorn Hall. This exhibition begins to prepare the MFA candidates for the experience of the MFA Thesis Exhibition in the following year.

Open Studios
At the end of each fall semester, the second-year MFA candidates open their studios to the public and invited guests from the art community. Each student is present to discuss his or her work in an informal setting.

Thesis Project
The Thesis Project begins in the second year with a written proposal that delineates the student's artistic practice and outlines what he or she aims to accomplish for the Thesis Exhibition. A Thesis Committee, composed of full-time and adjunct faculty, is chosen by the student. The Thesis Exhibition opens in May and is curated by an outside curator.

Other Events

In addition to the events and programs described above, the Visual Arts Program offers other special one-time and recurring events designed to enhance the quality of the two-year experience for artists in the program. "Friday Sessions," organized as a tutorial/workshop, bring both technical information and other discussion topics to students in a casual setting.

Facilities

Graduate studios are located at Watson Hall, 612 West 115th Street, and Prentis Hall, 632 West 125th Street. Each graduate student is assigned a studio with 24-hour access. Watson Hall also houses a wood shop, a Digital Media Center, a large format printer and a seminar room. Prentis Hall has classrooms, a ceramics room, wood and metal shops and a Digital Media Center.  Black-and-white photography and printmaking facilities are in Dodge Hall.

The intent of our interdisciplinary program is to enable Visual Arts students to explore every conceivable form of visual expression. Students majoring in Visual Arts at Columbia University is provided with instruction in the tools and techniques necessary for the production of art while enhancing their creative, critical and analytic voice. Whether choosing to concentrate in Drawing, Painting, Sculpture, Photography, Printmaking or Video, or embracing an artistic practice that incorporates any combination of these disciplines, the emphasis is on developing a student's personal vision.

Our majors benefit from working under the guidance of a distinguished full-time and adjunct faculty, all of whom are active visual artists with national and international reputations. Some of the key components of our program include Seminar in Contemporary Art Practice, Senior Thesis, art studios for majors, Art History, and graduate student mentors. These hallmarks of our program introduce students to the various pertinent dialogues within contemporary art, provide them with individual or shared space to develop their own studio practice, engage in specific art historical studies, foster mentor relationships with candidates from our renowned MFA program and offer opportunities to exhibit their work in the final semester of Senior Thesis.

A Major in Visual Arts from Columbia will provide a comprehensive and expansive foundation for artists in pursuit of their MFA, an exciting career in the arts as well as all other fields requiring a flexible and creative outlook.

For more information, please visit the Columbia College Visual Arts Bulletin.

Welcome to Cranbrook Academy of Art and Art Museum. I’d like to be the first to say hello and welcome you to the website, which serves as a portal to the historic and beautiful 319-acre Cranbrook campus. As the first graduate of the Academy to be named Director, I’m both humbled and honored to be leading this fabled institution into the twenty-first century.

For more than 75 years, Cranbrook has been one of the nation’s leading graduate schools of art, architecture, and design. It has been home to some of the world’s most renowned designers and artists. Eero Saarinen, Charles Eames, Daniel Libeskind, Michael and Katherine McCoy, and Jun Kaneko have all taught here, to name only a few. Our students have included Florence Knoll, Harry Bertoia, Jack Lenor Larsen, Nick Cave, Tony Matelli, Niels Diffrient, Lorraine Wild, Andrew Blauvelt, and Hani Rashid. It’s arguable that the work emanating from Cranbrook in the twentieth century changed the way people live, and the way they understand art and design. The New York Times has said that “the effect of Cranbrook and its graduates and faculty on the physical environment of this country has been profound…Cranbrook, surely more than any other institution, has a right to think of itself as synonymous with contemporary American design.”

The Academy is very unique. We don’t have set curricula, required classes, or prerequisites. We don’t have undergraduates. Most graduate schools offer a program that grows out of their undergraduate model. We offer something entirely different: a graduate-only program designed specifically to support individual exploration and mentoring. In addition, the Academy remains, per capita, the highest producer of student Fulbright scholars in the United States. The Academy also continues to be named one of the Fulbright program’s “Top Producing Institutions” by the Institute for International Education.

At Cranbrook, not only do our ten Artists-in-Residence determine how their programs are run, they work individually with students to determine their course of study. That study is always centered on a rigorous studio-based practice of making, informed by intensive and regular critique, and the opportunity to observe and work with leading practitioners in their own studio environments.

The Academy also has a world-class museum devoted exclusively to modern and contemporary art, architecture, and design. Cranbrook Art Museum was established in 1930 and opened in its current Eliel Saarinen-designed building in 1942. In an exciting new addition, the Museum underwent a $22 million restoration and expansion in 2011 and created a state-of-the-art Collections Wing that makes its entire collection visible—and accessible—to students, scholars, and visitors. The Cranbrook Archives and the offices of the Cranbrook Center for Collections and Research also are located within the Art Museum.

Visitors to the Museum experience a diverse program of exhibitions and events and a wide array of lectures, performances, and workshops for all ages. We highlight a broad spectrum of artists, architects, and designers from all corners of the globe and are a leading destination for those visiting Detroit who seek adventurous new art. Indeed, the museum is a place for discovery.

I am a staunch supporter of new art and new ideas, and encourage debate, exchange, and collaboration within and beyond the Cranbrook campus. As Director, I look forward to forging a future that builds upon the international reputation and history of innovation that has made Cranbrook one of the world’s leading centers for artistic excellence.

The integration of life and work

The architectural master plan conceived by Eliel Saarinen envisioned an Academy where the Artists-in-Residence, their families, and the students would live and work in close proximity. This structure is unique to Cranbrook. Life and work shift seamlessly into one another; dinners with visiting artists become epicenters of critical discussion, critiques extend the studio into the surrounding woods, early morning walks with colleagues become brainstorming sessions. The intimacy of the residential campus cannot be overstated. The dormitories, late-nights in the studios, the homes of each Artist-in-Residence, parties in Cranbrook Art Museum surrounded by fountains and gardens, and hiking trails around Kingswood Lake all create the fabric of a full-time Academy where the physical community matches the intellectual one.

Welcome to the School of Art and Design at Alfred University!

The programs of Alfred University’s School of Art and Design have been consistently ranked among the top art and design programs both in the United States and internationally. Students participate in a curriculum that provides a true multi-disciplinary environment for creative and scholarly research in art with a visionary focus on “high touch, high tech”.

Our faculty members are dedicated teachers who focus on the individual development of each student. They are also renowned artists and scholars who actively exhibit and publish their work.

The School of Art and Design looks to the future with an active engagement in the continuity of innovation and excellence that has defined its history. The creative energy of the School is centered on the vigorous ambitions of its students and the dedication of its faculty. This community of inspired artists and scholars is what makes the School of Art and Design an ideal place to learn about art and the creative process.

History
The School of Art and Design has an uncommon and celebrated history of engaging in the interface of art, science and technology. Joining the School of Engineering, the School of Art and Design dates back to 1900, when the New York State School of Clay-Working and Ceramics was established by an act of the legislature. This ultimately developed into the New York State College of Ceramics at Alfred University. Today, with 36 full-time faculty, 18 adjunct faculty, 14 technical and research specialists, and four administrative staff members, the School of Art and Design serves over 530 students majoring in art plus many additional undergraduates throughout Alfred University.

Programs
The School’s programs exist within the Divisions of Foundations; Ceramic Art; Drawing, Painting and Photography; Expanded Media; Sculpture/Dimensional Studies; and Art History and include graduate studies in Ceramic Art; Electronic Integrated Arts; and Sculpture/Dimensional Studies. The degrees offered include the Bachelor of Fine Arts (BFA), the Bachelor of Science in Art History and Theory (BS), and the Master of Fine Arts (MFA).

Galleries and facilities
Students in art and design engage in a uniquely rigorous program of study developed to encourage innovation and creativity in the making and thinking about art. Distinguished galleries and facilities include the Samuel R. Scholes Library, the Institute for Electronic Arts, the Alfred Ceramic Art Museum, the Fosdick-Nelson Gallery, the Cohen Art Center and Gallery, the Robert C. Turner Gallery, the National Casting Center, and the Paul Vickers Gardner Glass Center support the School’s programs.

The School of Art and Design offers a four-year, professional degree program leading to the Bachelor of Fine Arts (BFA) degree. The unique curriculum, which incorporates a specialized approach for each of the academic years of study, is recognized for its innovation in emphasizing disciplinary depth and interdisciplinary opportunities. Students work in state-of-the-art facilities and are provided with individual studios in their senior year.

Studies in art and design are enhanced by the rich course offerings through the College of Liberal Arts & Sciences, the College of Professional Studies, and the Inamori School of Engineering.

Foundations (Freshman Year)
Foundations is a first-year course predicated on generating a rigorous studio practice through comprehensive teaching philosophy that engages a broad range of questions, extending across and beyond artistic disciplines. Individual students bring their own experiences and skills into a community of peers. Drawing is a key component of the Foundations curriculum.

In addition to the Foundations studio courses in the first year, students complete 6 credits of art history by taking three 2-credit courses in non-western art, ancient to baroque art, and modern to contemporary art. First-year students also fulfill academic requirements in writing and humanities.

Sophomore Year
The sophomore curriculum is designed to enhance and further develop the studio experience of the Foundations year with the introduction to specific studio areas, all of which support the "high tech, high touch" vision of the School. The curriculum encourages study of studio disciplines represented across each of four Divisions - Ceramic Art; Expanded Media; Painting, Drawing and Photography; and Sculpture/Dimensional Studies. Drawing is a key component of the sophomore and junior year curriculum.

Sophomore students learn fundamental skills necessary in the development of an artistic practice. These include an awareness and ability to understand, use and integrate processes, tools, materials, and vocabularies. During this year students choose four studios, one from each division, or opt to take four studios in three divisions. This allows those who want to focus in a specific medium to do so, while allowing others a more varied studio experience. Both options are meant to prepare students for the challenges of the junior and senior curriculum.

The sophomore art history requirement, Issues and Debates in Contemporary Art, provides a stimulating and integrated context to the studio experience. Students also extend the breath of their academic experience by choosing elective courses from other schools and colleges at Alfred University.

Junior Year
Students entering the junior year have the latitude to define their interests and creative goals. Students naturally become more focused, integrating conceptual and technical skills while developing a personal vision in their art making. At the junior level, academic and elective course work fosters interest in cross-disciplinary practice and undergraduate research possibilities.

The junior year is also the time for students to take advantage of study abroad opportunities. The School of Art & Design has several exchange programs including agreements with the University for the Creative Arts at Farnham, England, Edinburgh College of Art in Scotland, Fachhochschule Koblenz University of Applied Sciences in Germany, the Central Academy of Fine Art in Beijing, China, and Sydney College of the Arts and the University of New South Wales in Australia. The Drawing, Painting and Photography Division offers a summer program through the Santa Reparata International School of Art in Florence, Italy.

Senior Year
Seniors work semi-independently in their own studio spaces, and are required to meet weekly with two faculty advisors (instructors) to discuss their work, research and process. Additionally, seniors participate in seminars, visiting artists programs, group critiques, discussions, and exhibitions. Defining their own direction, seniors develop and produce a consistent body of work, which draws on their individual experiences, acquired skills and personal vision. The culmination of the BFA degree is the senior thesis exhibition.

During the final two weeks of the academic year, the School of Art and Design is transformed into quality exhibition space where graduating seniors display their thesis work. The opening celebration of Senior Shows includes families and numerous guests from throughout Western New York State. Following the openings, students come back into their exhibition spaces for final reviews and faculty critiques. The momentum gained during the senior year prepares graduates to enter the work force as highly accomplished and motivated artists and designers.
Climbing and Walking Robots 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Edited by 
Behnam Miripdur 

In -Tech 

intechweb.org 

Published by In-Teh 

In-Teh 

Olajnica 19/2, 32000 Vukovar, Croatia 

Abstracting and non-profit use of the material is permitted with credit to the source. Statements and 
opinions expressed in the chapters are these of the individual contributors and not necessarily those of 
the editors or publisher. No responsibility is accepted for the accuracy of information contained in the 
published articles. Publisher assumes no responsibility liability for any damage or injury to persons or 
property arising out of the use of any materials, instructions, methods or ideas contained inside. After 
this work has been published by the In-Teh, authors have the right to republish it, in whole or part, in any 
publication of which they are an author or editor, and the make other personal use of the work. 

© 2010 In-teh 

www . intech web . org 

Additional copies can be obtained from: 

publication@intechweb.org 

First published March 2010 
Printed in India 

Technical Editor: Zeljko Debeljuh 
Cover designed by Dino Smrekar 

Climbing and Walking Robots, 
Edited by Behnam Miripour 

p. cm. 
ISBN 978-953-307-030-8 

Preface 

Nowadays robotics is one of the most dynamic fields of scientific researches. The shift 
of robotics researches from manufacturing to services applications is clear. During the 
last decades interest in studying climbing and walking robots has been increased. This 
increasing interest has been in many areas that most important ones of them are: mechanics, 
electronics, medical engineering, cybernetics, controls, and computers. Today's climbing 
and walking robots are a combination of manipulative, perceptive, communicative, and 
cognitive abilities and they are capable of performing many tasks in industrial and non- 
industrial environments. Surveillance, planetary exploration, emergence rescue operations, 
reconnaissance, petrochemical applications, construction, entertainment, personal services, 
intervention in severe environments, transportation, medical and etc are some applications 
from a very diverse application fields of climbing and walking robots. By great progress in 
this area of robotics it is anticipated that next generation climbing and walking robots will 
enhance lives and will change the way the human works, thinks and makes decisions. 

This book presents the state of the art achievments, recent developments, applications and 
future challenges of climbing and walking robots. These are presented in 26 chapters by 
authors throughtot the world. The book serves as a reference especially for the researchers 
who are interested in mobile robots. It also is useful for industrial engineers and graduate 
students in advanced study. 

Editor 
Behnam Miripour 

VI 

VII 

Contents 

Preface V 

1 . A Survey of Technologies and Applications for Climbing Robots Locomotion 

and Adhesion 001 

Manuel F. Silva and J. A. Tenreiro Machado 

2. Mechanical Synthesis for Easy and Fast Operation in Climbing and Walking Robots 023 
Antonio Gonzalez-Rodriguez, Angel G. Gonzalez-Rodriguez and Rafael Morales 

3. A Wheel-based Stair-climbing Robot with a Hopping Mechanism 043 
Koki Kikuchi, Naoki Bushida, Keisuke Sakaguchi, Yasuhiro Chiba, Hiroshi Otsuka, 

Yusuke Saito, Masamitsu Hirano and Shunya Kobayashi 

4. Motion Control of a Four-wheel-drive Omnidirectional Wheelchair with 

High Step Climbing Capability 057 

Masayoshi Wada 

5. Stair Climbing Robots and High-grip Crawler 073 
Kan Yoneda, Yusuke Ota and Shigeo Hirose 

6. A Climbing-Flying Robot for Power Line Inspection 095 
Jaka Katrasnik, Franjo Pernus and Bostjan Likar 

7. A Fuzzy Control Based Stair-Climbing Service Robot 1 1 1 
Ming-Shyan Wang 

8. Evolutionary Multi-Objective Optimization for Biped Walking of Humanoid Robot 127 
Toshihiko Yanase and Hitoshi Iba 

9. On Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendons in Bipedal Walking Energetics 141 
Reza Ghorbani and Qiong Wu 

10. Mathematical Modelling and Simulation of Combined Trajectory Paths of a 

Seven Link Biped Robot 165 

Ahmad Bagheri, Behnam Miripour-Fard and Peiman Naseradin Mousavi 

1 1 . Bipedal Walking Control based on the Assumption of the Point-contact: 

Sagittal Motion Control and Stabilization 185 

Tadayoshi Aoyama, Kosuke Sekiyama, Yasuhisa Hasegawa and Toshio Fukuda 

VIM 

12. Simulated Regulator to Synthesize ZMP Manipulation and Foot Location for 
Autonomous Control of Biped Robots 201 

Tomomichi Sugihara 

1 3. Nonlinear Hoc Control Applied to Biped Robots 21 3 
Adriano A. G. Siqueira, Marco H. Terra and Leonardo Tubota 

14. Method to Estimate the Basin of Attraction and Speed Switch Control for the 
Underactuated Biped Robot 233 
Yantao Tian, Limei Liu, Xiaoliang Huang, Jianfei Li and Zhen Sui 

15. Zappa, a Compliant Quasi-Passive Biped Robot with a Tail and Elastic Knees 253 
Felix Monasterio-Huelin, Alvaro Gutierrez and Fernando J. Berenguer 

16. Quadrupedal Gait Generation Based on Human Feeling for Animal Type Robot 265 
Hidekazu Suzuki and Hitoshi Nishi 

17. Gait Based Directional Bias Detection of Four-Legged Walking Robots 277 
Wei-Chung Teng and Ding-Jie Huang 

18. Locomotion analysis of hexapod robot 291 
Xilun Ding, Zhiying Wang, Alberto Rovetta and J.M. Zhu 

19. In situ self-reconfiguration of hexapod robot OSCAR using biologically inspired 
approaches 31 1 
Bojan Jakimovski and Erik Maehle 

20. Softly Stable Walk Using Phased Compliance Control with Virtual Force for 
Multi-Legged Walking Robot 333 
Qingjiu Huang 

21 . Biohybrid Walking Microrobot with Self-assembled Cardiomyocytes 351 
Jinseok Kim, Eui-Sung Yoon and Sukho Park 

22. Theoretical and Experimental Study for Queueing System with Walking Distance 371 
Daichi Yanagisawa, Yushi Suma, Akiyasu Tomoeda, Ayako Kimura, Kazumichi Ohtsuka 

and Katsuhiro Nishinari 

23. Intention-Based Walking Support for Paraplegia Patients with Robot Suit HAL 383 
Kenta Suzuki, Gouji Mito, Hiroaki Kawamoto, Yasuhisa Hasegawa and Yoshiyuki Sankai 

24. Development of Vision Based Person Following Module for Mobile Robots in 
RT-Middleware 409 
Hiroshi Takemura, Zentaro Nemote, Keita Ito and Hiroshi Mizoguchi 

25. A-B Autonomy of A Shape-shifting Robot "AMOEBA-I" for USAR 425 

Yuechao Wang, Jinguo Liu and Bin Li 

26. The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking 

pattern generation 445 

Mario Arbulu, Dmitry Kaynov and Carlos Balaguer 

1 

A Survey of Technologies and Applications for 
Climbing Robots Locomotion and Adhesion 

Manuel F. Silva and J. A. Tenreiro Machado 

ISEP - Instituto Superior de Engenharia do Porto 

Portugal 

1. Introduction 

The interest in the development of climbing robots has grown rapidly in the last years. Climb- 
ing robots are useful devices that can be adopted in a variety of applications, such as main- 
tenance and inspection in the process and construction industries. These systems are mainly 
adopted in places where direct access by a human operator is very expensive, because of the 
need for scaffolding, or very dangerous, due to the presence of an hostile environment. The 
main motivations are to increase the operation efficiency, by eliminating the costly assembly 
of scaffolding, or to protect human health and safety in hazardous tasks. Several climbing 
robots have already been developed, and other are under development, for applications rang- 
ing from cleaning to inspection of difficult to reach constructions. 

A wall climbing robot should not only be light, but also have large payload, so that it may 
reduce excessive adhesion forces and carry instrumentations during navigation. These ma- 
chines should be capable of travelling over different types of surfaces, with different inclina- 
tions, such as floors, walls, or ceilings, and to walk between such surfaces (Elliot et al. (2006); 
Sattar et al. (2002)). Furthermore, they should be able of adapting and reconfiguring for vari- 
ous environment conditions and to be self-contained. 

Up to now, considerable research was devoted to these machines and various types of exper- 
imental models were already proposed (according to Chen et al. (2006), over 200 prototypes 
aimed at such applications had been developed in the world by the year 2006). However, 
we have to notice that the application of climbing robots is still limited. Apart from a couple 
successful industrialized products, most are only prototypes and few of them can be found 
in common use due to unsatisfactory performance in on-site tests (regarding aspects such as 
their speed, cost and reliability). Chen et al. (2006) present the main design problems affecting 
the system performance of climbing robots and also suggest solutions to these problems. 
The major two issues in the design of wall climbing robots are their locomotion and adhesion 
methods. 

With respect to the locomotion type, four types are often considered: the crawler, the wheeled, 
the legged and the propulsion robots. Although the crawler type is able to move relatively 
faster, it is not adequate to be applied in rough environments. On the other hand, the legged 
type easily copes with obstacles found in the environment, whereas generally its speed is 
lower and requires complex control systems. 

Regarding the adhesion to the surface, the robots should be able to produce a secure gripping 
force using a light-weight mechanism. The adhesion method is generally classified into four 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

groups: suction force, magnetic, gripping to the surface and thrust force type. Nevertheless, 
recently new methods for assuring the adhesion, based in biological findings, were proposed. 
The vacuum type principle is light and easy to control though it presents the problem of 
supplying compressed air. An alternative, with costs in terms of weight, is the adoption of 
a vacuum pump. The magnetic type principle implies heavy actuators and is used only for 
ferromagnetic surfaces. The thrust force type robots make use of the forces developed by 
thrusters to adhere to the surfaces, but are used in very restricted and specific applications. 
Bearing these facts in mind, this chapter presents a survey of different applications and tech- 
nologies adopted for the implementation of climbing robots locomotion and adhesion to sur- 
faces, focusing on the new technologies that are recently being developed to fulfill these ob- 
jectives. The chapter is organized as follows. Section two presents several applications of 
climbing robots. Sections three and four present the main locomotion principles, and the 
main "conventional" technologies for adhering to surfaces, respectively. Section five describes 
recent biological inspired technologies for robot adhesion to surfaces. Section six introduces 
several new architectures for climbing robots. Finally, section seven outlines the main conclu- 
sions. 

2. Climbing Robots Applications 

Climbing robots are mainly adopted in places where direct access by a human operator is very 

expensive, because of the need for scaffolding, or very dangerous, due to the presence of an 

hostile environment. 

In the last decades different applications have been envisioned for these robots, mainly in the 

areas of cleaning, technical inspection, maintenance or breakdown diagnosis in dangerous 

environments, or in the outside of tall buildings and human made constructions. 

Several climbing robots have already been developed for the following application areas: 

• Inspection: bridges (Balaguer et al. (2005); Robert T. Pack and Kawamura (1997)), nu- 
clear power plants (Savall et al. (1999); Yan et al. (1999)), pipelines (Park et al. (2003)), 
wind turbines (Rodriguez et al. (2008)), solar power plants (Azaiz (2008)), for scanning 
the external and internal surfaces of gas or oil tanks (Longo and Muscato (2004b); Park 
et al. (2003); Sattar et al. (2002); Yan et al. (1999)), offshore platforms (Balaguer et al. 
(2005)), and container ships (Mondal et al. (2002)); 

• Testing: performing non-destructive tests in industrial structures (Choi et al. (2000); 
Kang et al. (2003)), floating production storage oil tanks (Sattar et al. (2008; 2006)), 
planes (Backes et al. (1997); Chen et al. (2005); Robert T. Pack and Kawamura (1997)) 
and ships (Armada et al. (2005); Robert T. Pack and Kawamura (1997); Sanchez et al. 
(2006)); 

• Civil construction: civil construction repair and maintenance (Balaguer et al. (2005)); 

• Cleaning: cleaning operations in sky-scrapers (Derriche and Kouiss (2002); Elkmann et 
al. (2002); Gao and Kikuchi (2004); Yan et al. (1999); Zhang et al. (2004); Zhu et al. (2003)), 
for cleaning the walls and ceilings of restaurants, community kitchens and food prepa- 
ration industrial environments (Cepolina et al. (2004)) and cleaning ship hulls (Fernan- 
dez et al. (2002)); 

• Transport: for the transport of loads inside buildings (Minor et al. (2000)); 

• Security: for reconnaissance in urban environments (Elliot et al. (2006); Tummala et al. 
(2002)) and in anti-terrorist activities (Li et al. (2007)). 

A Survey of Technologies and Applications for Climbing Robots Locomotion and Adhesion 

Finally, their application has also been proposed in the education (Bell and Balkcom (2006); 
Berns et al. (2005)) and human care (Balaguer et al. (2005)) areas and in the prevention and fire 
fighting actions (Chen et al. (2006); Nishi (1991)). 

3. Principles of Locomotion 

In this section are analyzed the characteristics of the four main locomotion technologies im- 
plemented in climbing robots, namely the crawler, wheeled, legged and propulsion types. 

3.1 Locomotion using Sliding Segments (Crawling) 

With respect to the locomotion type, the simpler alternatives often make use of sliding seg- 
ments, with suction cups (Backes et al. (1997); Cepolina et al. (2004); Choi et al. (2000); Elk- 
mann et al. (2002); Savall et al. (1999); Zhang et al. (2004); Zhu et al. (2003)) or permanent 
magnets (Yan et al. (1999)) that grab to surfaces, in order to move (Figure 1). The main disad- 
vantage of this solution is the difficulty in crossing cracks and obstacles. 

Suction 

pads 

Fig. 1. ROBICEN III climbing robot (Savall et al. (1999)) 

3.2 Locomotion using Wheels 

A second form of locomotion is to adopt wheels (Gao and Kikuchi (2004); Longo and Muscato 
(2004b); Park et al. (2003); Sanchez et al. (2006); Yan et al. (1999)) (Figure 2). These robots 
can achieve high velocities. However, some of the wheeled robots that use the suction force 
for adhesion to the surface, need to maintain an air gap between the surface where they are 
moving over and the robot base. This technique may create problems either with the loss of 
pressure, or with the friction with the surface, namely if the air gap is too small, or if some 
material is used to prevent the air leak (Hirose et al. (1991)). 

3.3 Locomotion using Legs 

A third form of locomotion consists in the adoption of legs. Legged climbing robots, equipped 
with suction cups, or magnetic devices on the feet, have the disadvantage of low speed and re- 
quire complex control systems, but allow the creation of a strong and stable adhesion force to 
the surface. These machines also have the advantage of easily coping with obstacles or cracks 
found in the environment (Hirose et al. (1991)). Structures having from two up to eight legs 
are predominant for the development of these tasks. The adoption of a larger number of limbs 
supplies redundant support and, frequently, raises the payload capacity and safety. These ad- 
vantages are achieved at the cost of increased control complexity (regarding leg coordination), 
size and weight. Therefore, when size and efficiency are critical, a structure with minimum 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

PERMANENT WAG NETS 

Fig. 2. CAD representation of an wheeled climbing robot (left) and its real aspect 
(right) (Sanchez et al. (2006)) 

weight and complexity is more adequate. For these reasons the biped structure is an excellent 
candidate (Figure 3). Presently there are many biped robots with the ability of climbing over 
surfaces with different slopes (Armada et al. (2005); Balaguer et al. (2005); Brockmann (2006); 
Krosuri and Minor (2003); Resino et al. (2006); Robert T. Pack and Kawamura (1997); Shores 
and Minor (2005); Tummala et al. (2002); Xiao et al. (2003; 2004)). 

Fig. 3. RAMR1 biped climbing robot (Tummala et al. (2002)) 

When is needed an increased safety or payload capability are adopted quadrupeds (Armada 
et al. (2005); Daltorio et al. (2005); Hirose and Arikawa (2000); Hirose et al. (1991); Kang et al. 
(2003); Kennedy et al. (2006)) (such as MRWALLSPECT III, presented in Figure 4), or robots 
with a larger number of legs (Armada et al. (2005); Inoue et al. (2006); Li et al. (2007)). The 
control and leg coordination of these larger robots is, however, more complicated. 

3.4 Locomotion through Propulsion 

The propulsion type robots make use of the forces developed by propellers to move and to 
adhere to the surfaces (Nishi (1991)), but are used in very restricted and specific applications. 
Nishi (1991) developed a climbing robot using the thrust force of propellers to locomote (Fig- 
ure 5). The contact between the robot and the surface is maintained though a large number 
of non-actuated wheels. The thrust force is inclined to the wall side to produce the frictional 
force between the wheels and the surface. Since strong wind is predicted on the wall surfaces 

A Survey of Technologies and Applications for Climbing Robots Locomotion and Adhesion 

Fig. 4. MRWALLSPECT III quadruped climbing robot (Kang et al. (2003)) 

of high buildings, the direction of thrust force is controlled to compensate the wind force act- 
ing on the robot. A frictional force augmentor is also considered, which is an airfoil to produce 
the lift force directed to the wall side by the cross wind. Nevertheless, is has been shown that 
slipping of this robot occurs for abrupt changes in the wind direction or speed. 

% 

^r 

^r 

^ 

Fig. 5. A conceptual model of a propeller based wall climbing robot (Nishi (1991)) 

4. Technologies for Adhering to Surfaces 

The most important work in developing a climbing robot project is to design a proper ad- 
hesion mechanism to ensure that the robot sticks to various wall surfaces reliably without 
sacrificing mobility (Elliot et al. (2006)). 

In this section are reviewed the main aspects of the four adhesion methods usually adopted 
in climbing robots: suction force, magnetic, gripping to the surface and thrust force type. The 
next section will review in some depth the new methods for assuring the adhesion, based in 
biological findings. 

4.1 Suction Force 

The most frequent approach to guarantee the robot adhesion to a surface is to use the suction 
force. The vacuum type principle requires light mechanisms and is easy to control. This oper- 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

ating principle allows climbing over arbitrarily surfaces, made of distinct types of materials, 
and can be implemented by using different strategies. Usually, more than one vacuum cup 
is used in each feet in order to prevent loss of pressure (and adhesion force) due to surface 
curvature or irregularities (Chen et al. (2006); Hirose et al. (1991)). Nevertheless, this type of 
attachment has some associated drawbacks. The suction adhesion mechanism requires time 
to develop enough vacuum to generate sufficient adhesion force. This delay may reduce the 
speed at which the robot can locomote. Another issue associated with suction adhesion is that 
any gap in the seal can cause the robot to fall. This drawback limits the suction cup adhesion 
mechanism to relatively smooth, nonporous and non-cracked surfaces. Finally, the suction 
adhesion mechanism relies on the ambient pressure to stick to a wall and, therefore, is not 
useful in space applications, because the ambient pressure in space is essentially zero (Menon 
et al. (2004)). Another problem is the supply of compressed air. The vacuum can be gener- 
ated through the Venturi Principle (Balaguer et al. (2005); Choi et al. (2000); Elkmann et al. 
(2002); Savall et al. (1999); Zhang et al. (2004)), or through a vacuum pump, either on-board 
the robot (Cepolina et al. (2004); Gao and Kikuchi (2004); Kang et al. (2003); Li et al. (2007); 
Tummala et al. (2002); Yan et al. (1999)), or external to it (Zhu et al. (2003)). 
The RAMR1 is an example of a biped climbing robot, adopting suction cups for the adhesion 
to the surface, being the vacuum generated through an on-board vacuum pump (Figure 3). 
When the vacuum is generated through the Venturi Principle, or through vacuum pumps, 
it makes climbing robots noisy. A solution for this noise problem has been proposed (Li et 
al. (2007)). Vacuum pumps on-board the robot increase the weight and the costs of a robot, 
also due to additional vacuum tubes, muffles, valves, and other necessary equipment. This 
solution causes some level of steady, not negligible, energy consumption. Vacuum pumps 
external to the robot imply the need for a tether cable, with the inherent problems of the 
interference of the umbilical cord for the robot with its mobility and dynamics (Chen et al. 
(2006)). Hence, it is desirable to avoid an active vacuum generation and a separate installation 
for vacuum transportation. 

Bearing these ideas in mind, Brockmann proposed the use of passive suction cups (see Fig- 
ure 6) because they are low cost, simple and robust and allow a light-weight construction 
of climbing robots. However, although being a promising approach, in order to construct a 
proper system, several aspects related to the behavior of passive suction cups have to be better 
understood (Brockmann (2006)). 

Fig. 6. Passive suction cups with (left) and without (right) a strap (Brockmann (2006)) 

An alternative way to create the adhesion is to adopt air aspiration on a sliding chamber and 
then to move the robot through wheels (Longo and Muscato (2004a;b)). A variation of this 
adhesion method is presented by Elliot et al. (2006) and implemented in the City-Climber 
robot. These researchers designed a device based on the aerodynamic attraction produced 
by a vacuum rotor package which generates a low pressure zone enclosed by a chamber. 
The vacuum rotor package consists of a vacuum motor with impeller and exhaust cowling to 

A Survey of Technologies and Applications for Climbing Robots Locomotion and Adhesion 

direct air flow, as shown in Figure 6, left. It is essentially a radial flow device which combines 
two types of air flow. The high speed rotation of the impeller causes the air to be accelerated 
toward the outer perimeter of the rotor, away from the center radially. Air is then pulled along 
the spin axis toward the device creating a low-pressure region, or partial vacuum region if 
sealed adequately, in front of the device. With the exhaust cowling, the resultant exhaust of 
air is directed toward the rear of the device, actually helping to increase the adhesion force by 
thrusting the device forward. 

^^^iHFjri* 

mj^^^mf Vacuum 
^HW motor 

Exhaust 
(Inner) 

*f air out 

K 

Exhaust 1 
(outer) 

f%^^ J9 

j/£- ^ Vacuum 
air in ^^^^^^ impeller 

Fig. 7. Vacuum rotor package to generate aerodynamic attraction (left) and exploded view of 
the City-Climber prototype-II (right) (Elliot et al. (2006)) 

The experimental test demonstrated that the City-Climber with the module weight of 1 kg 
(Figure 6, right), can handle 4.0 kg additional payload when moving on brick walls. 
Recently, a new technology, named Vortex Regenerative Air Movement (VRAM), was 
patented (Reinfeld and Illingworth (2002)). This adhesion system adopts vortex to generate 
high adhesion forces with a low power consumption, and allows the robot to travel on both 
smooth and rough surfaces. However, the adhesion force generated by the vortex technology 
is not enough to support large payload (Elliot et al. (2006)) and it is difficult for the robot to 
make wall-to-wall, and wall-to-ceiling transitions. 

4.2 Magnetic Force 

The magnetic adhesion is an alternative principle adopted for creating the adhesion force, in 
specific cases where the surface allows it. Magnetic attachment can be highly desirable due 
to its inherent reliability. This method is fast, but implies the adoption of heavy actuators. 
Despite that, magnetic attachment is useful only in specific environments where the surface is 
ferromagnetic and, therefore, for most applications it represents an unsuitable option (Menon 
et al. (2004)). 

The most frequent solution is the use of electromagnets (Armada et al. (2005); Shores and 
Minor (2005)). Another possibility is the use of permanent magnets to adhere to the surface, 
combined with wheels or tracks to move along it (Mondal et al. (2002); Sanchez et al. (2006); 
Yan et al. (1999)). The main advantages of this last solution are the fact that there is not the 
need to spend energy for the adhesion process, it will not occur any loss of adhesion in the 
event of a power failure and permanent magnets are suitable for application in hazardous 
environments (Berns et al. (2005); Mondal et al. (2002)). A third solution is to use magnetic 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

wheels that allow to implement the locomotion and the adhesion at the same time (Park et al. 

(2003)). 

The adoption of permanent magnets makes the robot more reliable and safer but there is a 

drawback: it is more difficult to control the adhesion and release of the robot to the surfaces 

in which it must work (Yan et al. (1999). 

4.3 Gripping to the Surface 

The previous adhesion techniques make the robots suitable for moving on flat walls and ceil- 
ings. However, it is difficult for them to move on irregular surfaces or surfaces like wire 
meshes. 

In order to surpass this difficulty, some robots climb through man made structures or through 
natural environments, by gripping themselves to the surface where they are moving. These 
robots typically exhibit grippers (Balaguer et al. (2005)) (Figure 8), or other special designed 
gripping systems (Balaguer et al. (2005); Bell and Balkcom (2006); Inoue et al. (2006); Kennedy 
et al. (2006); Linder et al. (2005)), at the extremity of their limbs. 

Examples of this kind of robots, are the ROMA 1 robot (Figure 8), that has two legs with 
grippers at their ends, for travelling in complex metallic-based environment (Balaguer et al. 
(2005)). 

If 1 

Fig. 8. ROMA1 robot climbing a beam-based structure (Balaguer et al. (2005)) 

Another example, is the ASIBOT robot (Figure 9), able to move between different points 
(Docking Stations) of the rooms through an innovative grasping method based on special 
connectors and a bayonet fitting (Balaguer et al. (2005)). 

The Lemur lib quadruped (Figure 10), intended for free climbing in steep terrain found in 
space exploration (Kennedy et al. (2006)), climbs over irregular surfaces just like if it was 
escalating a rock wall. 

Finally, the ASTERISK robot (Inoue et al. (2006)) (Figure 11) is equipped with a special mech- 
anism at the extremities of its limbs in order to grab and move on surfaces like wire meshes. 
It is also worth mentioning, the toy climbing robot developed at the University of Dart- 
mouth (Figure 12). A major design goal was to keep the project as simple as possible, making 
feasible for the general public to buy an inexpensive kit for building the robot. Based on these 
ideas, the robot was built of hobby servo-motors and LEGO pieces, and is capable of climbing 
a wall of pegs (Bell and Balkcom (2006); Linder et al. (2005)). 

A Survey of Technologies and Applications for Climbing Robots Locomotion and Adhesion 

P^H P^i* | 

m. 

m 

Fig. 9. ASIBOT climbing robot locomotion principle (Balaguer et al. (2005)) 

Fig. 10. LEMUR lib robot climbing a test wall (Kennedy et al. (2006)) 

Fig. 11. ASTERISK robot hanging from a grid-like structure (Inoue et al. (2006)) 

10 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 12. The robot on the climbing wall (Bell and Balkcom (2006)) 

4.4 Thrust Force Adhesion 

The prototypes that make use of this adhesion principle have been developed for working in 
submerged applications. These machines mainly allow to perform in-service inspection of the 
floor and walls of oil, petroleum and chemical storage tanks while submerged in the liquid, 
thereby saving the cost of emptying, cleaning and manually inspecting the tank (Sattar et al. 
(2002)). 

The RobTank climbing robot, developed by Sattar et al. (2002), can enter oil and chemical 
storage tanks through 300 mm, or more, diameter openings in their roof, travel on the floor, 
rotate through any angle within the full 360°, and change surfaces from the floor to the wall 
and back to the floor. Regarding the locomotion, two servomotors provide the drive for the 
wheels of the vehicle while one propeller, mounted on top of the vehicle, provides the thrust 
force for adhesion to the wall. This way, this vehicle is able to climb on all types of surfaces. 
Latter, Sattar et al. (2006) developed a climbing robot for Non-Destructive Testing of the in- 
ternal tank wall and floor surfaces on Floating Production Storage Oil (FPSO) (see Figure 13, 
left). 

This robot is equipped with two independent, speed controlled, thrusters that move the robot 
in a horizontal plane in the forward and reverse direction or rotate it to face in any direction. 
After contact with a wall, thrust forces generated by these two thrusters guarantee the adhe- 
sion to the wall, while actuated wheels move the robot on the wall. The robot manoeuvres 
freely on the wall and can be driven down from a wall to the floor of the tank and back on to 
it (see Figure 13, right). 

A variable buoyancy tank was latter developed to change buoyancy around neutral by ob- 
taining volume change (Sattar et al. (2008)). The tank enables the robot to swim to a given 
depth and to be parked on the floor with negative buoyancy when inspecting the floor. 

5. Biological Inspired Adhesion Principles 

In spite of all the developments made up to now, the proposed technologies still need to be 
improved and no definite and stable solution has yet been found. Therefore, developments 
continue in this research area. 

In the last years a considerable inspiration has been gathered from climbing animals (Daltorio 
et al. (2005); Menon et al. (2004)). Insects, beetles, skinks, anoles, frogs and geckos have been 
studied for their sticking abilities (Figure 14). Beetles and Tokay geckos adhere to surfaces 

A Survey of Technologies and Applications for Climbing Robots Locomotion and Adhesion 

11 

Sealed and purged 
box lor Electrical 
components 

Fig. 13. Conceptual design of FPSO swimming and wall climbing robot (left) and wall- 
climbing robot climbing a tank glass wall without buoyancy tank (Sattar et al. (2006)) 

using patches of microscopic hairs that provide a mechanism for dry adhesion by van der 
Waals forces. Cockroaches climb a wide variety of substrates using their active claws, passive 
spines, and smooth adhesive pads. Inspired by these animals mechanisms, new methods for 
assuring the adhesion, based in biological findings, have recently been proposed. 

Fig. 14. Gecko foot while climbing a glass surface (Torrissen (Last Acessed: October 1, 2009)) 

Using bio-inspired adhesive technology, robots could potentially be developed to traverse a 
wide variety of surfaces, regardless of the presence of air pressure or the specific material 
properties of the substrate. Robots using such adhesives might some day be able to climb 
uneven, wet surfaces. 

Bearing these ideas in mind, this section is organized as follows. The next subsection presents 
some climbing robots that use gecko inspired synthetic dry adhesives. The following subsec- 
tion introduces climbing robots using micro-structured polymer feet in order to adhere to the 
surfaces. Lastly, the third subsection, describes some climbing robots using microspines. 

5.1 Climbing Robots Using Gecko Inspired Synthetic Dry Adhesives 

The ability of Geckos to climb surfaces, whether wet or dry, smooth or rough, has attracted 
people attention for decades. According to Menon et al. (2004), by means of compliant 
micro /nano-scale high aspect ratio beta-keratin structures at their feet, geckos manage to ad- 
here to almost any surface with a controlled contact area. It has been shown that adhesion 
is mainly due to molecular forces such as van der Waals forces. The geckofs ability to stick 

12 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

to surfaces lies in their feet, specifically the very fine hairs on its toes, as can be seen if Fig- 
ure 15. Those hairs are roughly 5 microns in diameter, and atop each of these micro-fibers sit 
hundreds of nano-fibers (spatulae) which are 200 nanometers in diameter. There are billions 
of these tiny fibers which make contact with the surface and create a significant collective sur- 
face area of contact. The hairs have physical properties which let them bend and conform 
to a wide variety of surface roughness, meaning that the adhesion arises from the structure 
of these hairs themselves. Also, because of their hydrophobic nature, the gecko fibers are 
self-cleaning. 

Fig. 15. Detail of the gecko foot (Wikipedia (Last Acessed: October 1, 2009)) 

Since dry adhesion is caused by van der Waals forces, surface chemistry is not of great impor- 
tance. This means that dry adhesion will work on almost any surface. 

Dry adhesion is more robust than the suction adhesion mechanism. If the dry adhesion pad 
encounters a crack or gap, there will still be adhesion on the parts of the pad that have made 
contact. This behavior allows a robot, using dry adhesion, to climb on a wider variety of 
surfaces. Also, since dry adhesion does not rely heavily on the surface material or the atmo- 
sphere, it is suitable for use in the vacuum of space as well as inside liquid environments 
Another benefit of dry adhesion is the speed at which attachment and detachment is possible. 
The attachment is nearly instantaneous as is the detachment, and they both only depend on 
the force applied. This leads to almost no delay in the locomotion, thus allowing very fast 
locomotion speeds. Furthermore, it is not necessary to control the timing of the attachment as 
critically as with the electromagnetic attachment. There is only the need to exert a pressure 
against the surface, so the attachment is passive in nature and, therefore, simple to control. 
Inspired by these ideas, Menon et al. (2004) presented two alternative methods to replicate the 
structure of the micro-hairs present at the geckos feet. 

The first one is based on the development of a synthetic adhesive. Much like the real gecko 
material it is expected that, in the future, the synthetic adhesive will be super-hydrophobic 
and, therefore, will be self-cleaning allowing for long lifetime robots. The nature of the adhe- 
sion force is such that no energy is required to maintain attachment after it has been initiated. 
Therefore, a robot using dry adhesion could hang on a wall indefinitely with no power con- 
sumption. 

A Survey of Technologies and Applications for Climbing Robots Locomotion and Adhesion 

13 

In order to test these synthetic dry fibrillar adhesives inspired in the geckos feet, Menon et al. 
(2004) developed two different vehicles to show the feasibility of the climbing mechanisms: 
the first one using legged wheels and the second robot consisting in a tread vehicle with cus- 
tomized tire. The legged-wheeled machine was latter improved by Murphy et al. (2006), giv- 
ing rise to a small-scale agile wall climbing robot, named Waalbot. The Waalbot is able to 
navigate over smooth surfaces of any orientation, including vertical and inverted surfaces, 
taking advantage of adhesive elastomer materials for attachment (Figure 16, left). This robot 
can climb and steer in any orientation using two actuated legs with rotary motion and two 
passive revolute joints at each foot. The presented prototype can climb 90° slopes at a speed 
of 6 cm/s and steer to any angle. 

Fig. 16. Photographs of prototype Tri-Foot Waalbot climbing a 90° vertical surface (left) (Mur- 
phy et al. (2006)) and of Geckobot (right) (Unver et al. (2006)) 

More recently, Menon and Sitti (2005) developed two other climbing robots with different 
concepts. The first robot, called the Rigid Gecko Robot (RGR), was designed for operating 
both in Earth and space environments. Reliability and robustness were the most important re- 
quirements for the RGR. It was a relatively large robot actuated by conventional motors. The 
second robot, called the Compliant Gecko Robot (CGR), was designed using unconventional 
technologies, allowing its miniaturization up to a few centimeters scale and was designed for 
terrestrial applications. The CGR prototype had a composite structure and its Gecko mimick- 
ing locomotion relies on shape memory alloy wire actuators. Unver et al. (2006) developed 
the climbing robot Geckobot (Figure 16, right) based on these two. The robot has an overall 
weight of 100 grams (including the electronic board) and featuring a peeling mechanism for 
the robot feet, since this aspect is very crucial for climbing robots power-efficient detachment 
(as seen in geckos). Geckobot can climb up to 85° stably on Plexiglas surfaces. However, it 
was verified that beyond this angle stability diminishes abruptly. 

The fibrillar adhesive presented by Menon et al. (2004) is still under development and does 
not achieve yet as high performances as other soft and dry adhesives. Synthetic gecko adhe- 
sive was tested and compared to soft adhesives such as Silly Puttyi£j and flat poly dimethyl 
siloxane (PDMS). It was experimentally verified that Silly Puttyi£j exerts the highest normal 
adhesive force and, therefore, it was chosen for testing their robotic application (Menon and 
Sitti (2005)). For testing the Geckobot it was used the PDMS adhesive (Unver et al. (2006)). 
Although PDMS is a stable material, it is degraded and contaminated by dust and dirt. There- 
fore, after some time it looses its adhesive characteristics. This problem would be improved by 
using micro-patterned PDMS, in order to have self-cleaning characteristics like geckos (Unver 

14 Climbing and Walking Robots 

et al. (2006)). For testing the Waalbot, Murphy et al. (2006) equiped the robot feet with polymer 
adhesive material (Smooth-On Vytaflex 10), which shares many performance characteristics 
with the envisioned dry adhesive material. As the adhesives used on the feet of the robot 
gather dust and other contaminants their performance degrades quickly. Therefore, these ad- 
hesives are not suitable for dirty outdoor environments, walking across indoor floors, or for 
long term tasks. 

5.2 Climbing Robots Using Micro-structured Polymer Feet 

Daltorio et al. (2005) converted Mini-Whegsi£j (Figure 17, left), a small robot that uses four 
wheel-legs for locomotion, to a wall-walking robot with compliant, conventional-adhesive 
feet (5.4 cm by 8.9 cm, 87 grams). The feet are bonded to contact areas on the ends of the spokes 
and the flexibility of the feet acts as a hinge between the feet and spokes. The feet contact the 
substrate, bend as the hub turns, peel off the substrate gradually, and spring back to their 
initial position for the next contact. These researchers report that the Mini-Whegsi£j 7 can 
climb glass walls and walk on ceilings, and perform transitions between orthogonal surfaces, 
using standard pressure sensitive adhesives. The main problem with this approach (although 
some tests were made to find the best foot design and adhesive tape contact area (Daltorio 
et al. (2007))) is that after some runs, the robot falls with increasing frequency as the tape 
becomes dirty or damaged. 

Fig. 17. Mini-Whegsi£j 7 on vertical glass (a) with office tape feet and (b) with micro-structured 
polymer feet and 25 cm long tail (tail not shown) (Daltorio et al. (2006)) 

Further developments of this robot, reported by Daltorio et al. (2006), lead to the replacement 
of the feet with a novel, reusable insect-inspired adhesive (Figure 17, right). Two polymer sam- 
ples were tested: a smooth one and an insect-inspired surface-structured one. The reusable 
structured polymer adhesive presents less tenacity than the previous adhesive, resulting in 
an inferior climbing capability. However, after the addition of a tail, changing to off-board 
power, and widening the feet, the robot was capable of ascending vertical surfaces using the 
novel adhesive. Comparing with the previous approach, the polymer feet retained their trac- 
tion/adhesive properties for several hours of testing and could be renewed by washing with 
soap and water. 

While the current robot only walks on clean smooth glass, a practical climbing robot should 
be able to traverse rougher surfaces as well. This requires adhesives to be resistant to dust and 
to oils. Additionally, alternative attachment mechanisms, such as insect-like claws or spines, 
could be added to take advantage of surface roughness. 

A Survey of Technologies and Applications for Climbing Robots Locomotion and Adhesion 15 

Based on these ideas, Wei et al. (2006) added claws, spines, and compliant ankles to Mini- 
Whegs, which allowed the machine to climb on soft or porous surfaces. The new front wheel- 
legs have each three spokes, with a foot (tarsus) connected at the end of each spoke. 

5.3 Climbing Robots Using Microspines 

According to what has been described, none of the above approaches is suitable for porous, 
and typically dusty, building surfaces such as brick, concrete, stucco or stone. 
Inspired by the mechanisms observed in some climbing insects and spiders, Asbeck et al. 
(2006) developed a technology that enables robots to scale flat, hard vertical surfaces, includ- 
ing concrete, brick, stucco and masonry, without using suction or adhesives. The scheme 
employs arrays of miniature spines that catch on surface asperities. Unlike the claws of a cat, 
small spines do not need to penetrate surfaces. Instead, they exploit small asperities (bumps 
or pits) on the surface. 

According to these authors, as spines become smaller it is possible to ascend smoother sur- 
faces because the density of useable spine /asperity contacts increases rapidly. However, it is 
needed a large number of spines because each contact sustains only a limited force. Therefore, 
the key design principles behind climbing with microspines are to ensure that (i) as many 
spines as possible will independently attach to the asperities, and that (ii) the total load is 
distributed among the spines as uniformly as possible. 

The above principles have been demonstrated in a 0.4 kg climbing robot, named Spinybot, that 
readily climbs hard surfaces such as concrete, brick, stucco and sandstone walls (Asbeck et al. 
(2006)). The robot has six limbs, and each one is an under-actuated mechanism powered using 
a single actuator in combination with passive compliance, which is responsible for engaging 
and disengaging the spines. A seventh actuator produces a ratcheting motion that alternately 
advances the legs in each of two tripods up the wall. Each feet of the Spinybot consists of 
ten planar toe mechanisms with two spines per toe. The mechanisms are created using a 
rapid prototyping process that permits hard and soft materials to be combined into a single 
structure. As shown in Figure 18, each toe includes several hard members, connected by soft 
links, with the spines embedded in the hard plastic. Each toe mechanism can deflect and 
stretch independently of its neighbors. This maximizes the probability that multiple spines, 
on each foot, will find asperities where they can "grab" and share the robot load. 

6. New Architectures for Climbing Robots 

New architectures have also been proposed for climbing robots in order to allow them to 
surpass different specific problems and applications. 

In most cases, large, clumsy gantries are necessary to guarantee access for cleaning staff, or 
climbers are hired at great cost, to clean the glass of the inner side of atriums and glass roofs. 
Therefore, this is an application suited to the use of climbing robots. However, the main 
problem is finding a means to safeguard the robot against falling. Moreover, it is extremely 
difficult for technical personnel to reach the robot and repair it, in the event of malfunctioning. 
With these ideas on mind, Elkmann et al. (2002) proposed a balloon-based robot for cleaning 
the inner side of atriums and glass roofs (Figure 19). The solution proposed by the researchers 
for automating this particular task, consists of a two-legged walking mechanism, with suction 
cups in contact with the glass, being the balloon guided by the walking mechanism along the 
roof. 

This system consists of a cigar-formed, helium-filled balloon with a walking mechanism and 
a cleaning tool located at the front end of the balloon. At the other end of the balloon are 

16 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 18. View of upper section of Spinybot on concrete wall and detailed view of a toe on the 
foot (Asbeck et al. (2006)) 

Fig. 19. Balloon-based robot consisting of a walking mechanism and a cleaning tool (Elkmann 
etal. (2002)) 

A Survey of Technologies and Applications for Climbing Robots Locomotion and Adhesion 

17 

modules like the control box, a water tank, and other systems for weight compensation. The 
balloon serves to lift the walking mechanism and the cleaning tool up to the glass surface. 
The robot cannot fall down and, if it is somehow damaged, the robot can be recovered by 
personnel by simply pulling the cables to the balloon down. 

Shores and Minor (2005) presented a morphic bipedal robot with hybrid locomotion, combin- 
ing the benefits of rolling, walking, and climbing locomotion (Figure 20). 

Cflmbinj 

Rolling 

Fig. 20. A hybridized robot transitioning between climbing, walking, and rolling (Shores and 
Minor (2005)) 

The design provides these locomotion primitives without the addition of actuators, beyond 
those required for climbing through the use of a disklike exoskeleton that provides a rolling 
surface. The feet are equipped with electromagnets that allow the robot to anchor each foot to 
a ferrous climbing surface. These magnetic feet are centered in the footprint of the exoskeleton 
to distribute the force of the magnet over a larger area and enable the magnets to support 
larger moments than they could normally. 

Degani et al. (2007) introduced a climbing robot mechanism, which uses dynamic movements 
to climb between two parallel vertical walls (Figure 21). This robot relies on its own internal 
dynamic motions to gain height. One benefit of this mechanism is that it allows climbing with 
only a single actuated degree of freedom. 

Fig. 21. Two typical motions of the dynamic climbing robot (the main body is traced over 
time) (a) Purely dynamic (single support) and (b) Double support. (Degani et al. (2007)) 

18 Climbing and Walking Robots 

7. Conclusions 

Considering the severity of many environments where there is the need for human labor, the 
exploitation of wall-climbing robots has undoubtedly a broad prospect. The main intended 
applications of these machines ranges from cleaning to inspection of difficult to reach con- 
structions. 

Up to now, considerable research was devoted to these machines and over 200 prototypes 
aimed at such applications had been developed in the world by the year 2006. Nonetheless, 
the application of climbing robots is still limited. Apart from a couple successful industrial- 
ized products, most are only prototypes and few of them can be found in common use due to 
unsatisfactory performance in on-site tests. 

To make wall-climbing robots a popular replacement of manual work, indispensable prereq- 
uisites are an high reliability and high efficiency, and, on the other hand, affordable prices. 
The fulfilment of these requirements is still far, which indicates that there is yet a long way of 
development and improvement. 

Given these considerations, this chapter presented a survey of several climbing robots, adopt- 
ing different technologies for locomotion and for the adhesion to surfaces. Several possible 
applications of the presented robots have also been discussed. A special emphasis has been 
given on the new technologies (mainly biological inspired) that are presently being developed 
for the robots adhesion to surfaces. 

8. References 

Armada, M. A., de Santos, P. G., Garcia, E., Prieto, M. and Nabulsi, S. (2005). Design of mobile 

robots, Proc. of the 2005 CLAWAR: Introductory Mobile Robotics Workshop, London, UK, 

pp. 2890-2895. 
Asbeck, A. T., Kim, S., McClung, A., Parness, A. and Cutkosky, M. R. (2006). Climbing walls 

with microspines, Proc. of the 2006 IEEE Int. Conf. on Rob. and Aut., Orlando, Florida, 

USA, pp. 4315-4317. 
Azaiz, R. (2008). Unifier U unified robotic system to service solar power plants, in L. Marques, 

A. de Almeida, M. O. Tokhi and G. S. Virk (eds), Advances in Mobile Robotics, World 

Scientific, pp. 1141-1145. 
Backes, P. G., Bar-Cohen, Y. and Joffe, B. (1997). The multifunctional automated crawling 

system (macs), Proc. of the 1997 IEEE Int. Conf. on Rob. and Aut., Albuquerque, New 

Mexico, USA, pp. 335-340. 
Balaguer, C, Gimenez, A. and Jardon, A. (2005). Climbing robotsS mobility for inspection and 

maintenance of 3d complex environments, Autonomous Robots 18(2): 157-169. 
Bell, M. and Balkcom, D. (2006). A toy climbing robot, Proc. of the 2006 IEEE Int. Conf. on Rob. 

and Aut., Orlando, Florida, USA, pp. 4366-4368. 
Berns, K., Braun, T., Hillenbrand, C. and Luksch, T. (2005). Developing climbing robots for 

education, in M. A. Armada and P. G. de Santos (eds), Climbing and Walking Robots, 

Springer, pp. 981-988. 
Brockmann, W. (2006). Concept for energy-autarkic, autonomous climbing robots, in M. O. 

Tokhi, G. S. Virk and M. A. Hossain (eds), Climbing and Walking Robots, Springer, 

pp. 107-114. 
Cepolina, F, Zoppi, M., Zurlo, G. and Molfino, R. (2004). A robotic cleaning agency, Proc. of 

IAS '2004 - 8 th Conf. on Intelligent Autonomous Systems, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 

pp. 1153-1161. 

A Survey of Technologies and Applications for Climbing Robots Locomotion and Adhesion 19 

Chen, H., Sheng, W., Xi, N. and Tan, J. (2005). Motion control of a micro biped robot for 

nondestructive structure inspection, Proc. of the 2005 IEEE Int. Conf. on Rob. and Aut., 

Barcelona, Spain, pp. 480-485. 
Chen, S., Shang, J., Zhao, Z., Sattar, T. and Bridge, B. (2006). Novel solutions to design prob- 
lems of industrial climbing robots, in M. O. Tokhi, G. S. Virk and M. A. Hossain (eds), 

Climbing and Walking Robots, Springer, pp. 139-146. 
Choi, H. R., Ryew, S. M., Kang, T. H., Lee, J. H. and Kim, H. M. (2000). A wall climbing robot 

with closed link mechanism, Proc. of the 2000 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots 

and Systems, pp. 2006 - 2011. 
Daltorio, K. A., Gorb, S., Peressadko, A., Horchler, A. D., Ritzmann, R. E. and Quinn, R. D. 

(2006). A robot that climbs walls using micro-structured polymer feet, in M. O. Tokhi, 

G. S. Virk and M. A. Hossain (eds), Climbing and Walking Robots, Springer, pp. 131- 

138. 
Daltorio, K. A., Horchler, A. D., Gorb, S., Ritzmann, R. E. and Quinn, R. D. (2005). A small 

wall-walking robot with compliant, adhesive feet, Proc. of the 2005 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. 

on Intel. Robots and Systems, pp. 4018-4023. 
Daltorio, K. A., Wei, T. E., Gorb, S. N., Ritzmann, R. E. and Quinn, R. D. (2007). Passive foot 

design and contact area analysis for climbing mini-whegs, Proc. of the 2007 IEEE Int. 

Conf. on Rob. and Aut., Roma, Italy, pp. 1274-1279. 
Degani, A., Shapiro, A., Choset, H. and Mason, M. T. (2007). A dynamic single actuator vertical 

climbing robot, Proc. of the 2007 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 

IEEE, San Diego, CA, USA, pp. 2901-2906. 
Derriche, O. and Kouiss, K. (2002). A cleaning robot for spherical buildings, in P. Bidaud and 

F. B. Amar (eds), 5th International Conference on Climbing and Walking Robots and the 

Support Technologies for Mobile Machines, Professional Engineering Publishing Lim- 
ited, pp. 993-1001. 
Elkmann, N., Felsch, T., Sack, M., Saenz, J. and Hortig, J. (2002). Innovative service robot 

systems for facade cleaning of difficult-to-access areas, Proc. of the 2002 IEEE/RSJ Int. 

Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 756 - 762. 
Elliot, M., Morris, W. and Xiao, J. (2006). City-climber: A new generation of wall-climbing 

robots, Proc. of the 2006 IEEE Int. Conf. on Rob. and Aut., Orlando, Florida, USA, 

pp. 4413-4415. 

Fernandez, R., Akinfiev, T. and Armada, M. (2002). Control algorithms for an underwater 
climbing robot, in P. Bidaud and F. B. Amar (eds), 5th International Conference on Climb- 
ing and Walking Robots and the Support Technologies for Mobile Machines, Professional 
Engineering Publishing Limited, pp. 985-992. 

Gao, X. and Kikuchi, K. (2004). Study on a kind of wall cleaning robot, Proc. of the IEEE Int. 
Conf. on Rob. and Biomimetics 2004. 

Hirose, S. and Arikawa, K. (2000). Coupled and decoupled actuation of robotic mechanisms, 
Proc. of the 2000 IEEE Int. Conf. on Rob. and Aut., San Francisco, California, USA, 
pp. 33-39. 

Hirose, S., Nagakubo, A. and Toyama, R. (1991). Machine that can walk and climb on floors, 
walls and ceilings, Proc. of the Fifth Int. Conf. on Advanced Rob., Pisa, Italy, pp. 753-758. 

Inoue, K., Tsurutani, T., Takubo, T. and Ami, T. (2006). Omni-directional gait of limb mech- 
anism robot hanging from grid-like structure, Proc. of the 2006 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on 
Intel. Robots and Systems, Beijing, China, pp. 1732-1737. 

20 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Kang, T., Kim, H., Son, T. and Choi, H. (2003). Design of quadruped walking and climbing 
robot, Proc. of the 2003 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Las Vegas, 
Nevada, USA, pp. 619 - 624. 

Kennedy, B., Okon, A., Aghazarian, H., Badescu, M., Bao, X., Bar-Cohen, Y, Chang, Z., Dabiri, 
B. E., Garrett, M., Magnone, L. and Sherrit, S. (2006). Lemur iib: a robotic system for 
steep terrain access, in M. O. Tokhi, G. S. Virk and M. A. Hossain (eds), Climbing and 
Walking Robots, Springer, pp. 1077-1084. 

Krosuri, S. P. and Minor, M. A. (2003). A multifunctional hybrid hip joint for improved adapt- 
ability in miniature climbing robots, Proc. of the 2003 IEEE Int. Conf. on Rob. and Aut., 
Taipei, Taiwan. 

Li, Y, tian Li, M. and ning Sun, L. (2007). Design and passable ability of transitions analysis of 
a six legged wall-climbing robot, Proc. of the 2007 IEEE Int. Conf. on Mechatronics and 
Aut., Harbin, China, pp. 800-804. 

Linder, S. P., Wei, E. and Clay, A. (2005). Robotic rock climbing using computer vision and 
force feedback, Proc. of the 2005 IEEE Int. Conf. on Rob. and Aut., Barcelona, Spain, 
pp. 4696-4701. 

Longo, D. and Muscato, G. (2004a). Design of a single sliding suction cup robot for inspection 
of non porous vertical wall, Proc. of the 35 th Int. Symposium on Rob., Paris, France, 
pp. 1153-1161. 

Longo, D. and Muscato, G. (2004b). A modular approach for the design of the alicia 3 climbing 
robot for industrial inspection, Industrial Robot: An International Journal 31(2): 148- 
158. 

Menon, C. and Sitti, M. (2005). Biologically inspired adhesion based surface climbing robots, 
Proc. of the 2005 IEEE Int. Conf. on Rob. and Aut., Barcelona, Spain, pp. 2726-2731. 

Menon, C, Murphy, M. and Sitti, M. (2004). Gecko inspired surface climbing robots, Proc. of 
the IEEE Int. Conf. on Rob. and Biomimetics 2004. 

Minor, M., Dulimarta, H., Danghi, G., Mukherjee, R., Tummala, R. L. and Aslam, D. (2000). De- 
sign, implementation, and evaluation of an under-actuated miniature biped climbing 
robot, Proc. of the 2000 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 1999- 
2005. 

Mondal, S., Sattar, T. P. and Bridge, B. (2002). Tofd inspection of v-groove butt welds on 
the hull of a container ship with a magnetically adhering wall climbing robot, in 
P. Bidaud and F. B. Amar (eds), 5th International Conference on Climbing and Walking 
Robots and the Support Technologies for Mobile Machines, Professional Engineering Pub- 
lishing Limited, pp. 955-961. 

Murphy, M. P., Tso, W., Tanzini, M. and Sitti, M. (2006). Waalbot: An agile small-scale wall 
climbing robot utilizing pressure sensitive adhesives, Proc. of the 2006 IEEE/RSJ Int. 
Conf. on Intel. Robots and Systems, Beijing, China, pp. 3411-3416. 

Nishi, A. (1991). A wall climbing robot using propulsive force of propeller, Proc. of the Fifth 
Int. Conf. on Advanced Rob., Pisa, Italy, pp. 320-325. 

Park, S., Jeong, H. D. and Lim, Z. S. (2003). Design of a mobile robot system for automatic 
integrity evaluation of large size reservoirs and pipelines in industrial fields, Proc. of 
the 2003 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, 
pp. 2618-2623. 

Reinfeld, D. and Illingworth, L. (2002). VORTEX GENERATOR - patent:EP1224396, 
http://www.freepatentsonline.com/EP1224396Al.html. 

A Survey of Technologies and Applications for Climbing Robots Locomotion and Adhesion 21 

Resino, J. C, Jardon, A., Gimenez, A. and Balaguer, C. (2006). Analysis of the direct and 

inverse kinematics of roma ii robot, in M. O. Tokhi, G. S. Virk and M. A. Hossain 

(eds), Climbing and Walking Robots, Springer, pp. 869-874. 
Robert T. Pack, J. L. C. J. and Kawamura, K. (1997). A rubbertuator-based structure-climbing 

inspection robot, Proc. of the 1997 IEEE Int. Conf. on Rob. and Aut., Albuquerque, New 

Mexico, USA, pp. 1869-1874. 
Rodriguez, H. L., Bridge, B. and Sattar, T. P. (2008). Climbing ring robot for inspection of 

offshore wind turbines, in L. Marques, A. de Almeida, M. O. Tokhi and G. S. Virk 

(eds), Advances in Mobile Robotics, World Scientific, pp. 555-562. 
Sanchez, J., Vazquez, F. and Paz, E. (2006). Machine vision guidance system for a modular 

climbing robot used in shipbuilding, in M. O. Tokhi, G. S. Virk and M. A. Hossain 

(eds), Climbing and Walking Robots, Springer, pp. 893-900. 
Sattar, T. P., Rodriguez, H. E. L. and Shang, J. (2008). Amphibious inspection robot, in L. Mar- 
ques, A. de Almeida, M. O. Tokhi and G. S. Virk (eds), Advances in Mobile Robotics, 

World Scientific, pp. 613-620. 
Sattar, T. P., Rodriguez, H. E. L., Shang, J. and Bridge, B. (2006). Automated ndt of floating 

production storage oil tanks with a swimming and climbing robot, in M. O. Tokhi, 

G. S. Virk and M. A. Hossain (eds), Climbing and Walking Robots, Springer, pp. 935- 

942. 
Sattar, T. P., Zhao, Z., Feng, J., Bridge, B., Mondal, S. and Chen, S. (2002). Internal in-service 

inspection of the floor and walls of oil, petroleum, and chemical storage tanks with a 

mobile robot, in P. Bidaud and F B. Amar (eds), 5th International Conference on Climb- 
ing and Walking Robots and the Support Technologies for Mobile Machines, Professional 

Engineering Publishing Limited, pp. 947-954. 
Savall, J., Avello, A. and Briones, L. (1999). Two compact robots for remote inspection of 

hazardous areas in nuclear power plants, Proc. of the 1999 IEEE Int. Conf. on Rob. and 

Aut., Detroit, Michigan, USA, pp. 1993-1998. 
Shores, B. E. and Minor, M. A. (2005). Design, kinematic analysis, and quasi-steady control of 

a morphic rolling disk biped climbing robot, Proc. of the 2005 IEEE Int. Conf. on Rob. 

and Aut., Barcelona, Spain, pp. 2732-2737. 
Torrissen, B. C. (Last Acessed: October 1, 2009). http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 

File : Gecko_f oot_on_glass . JPG. 
Tummala, R. L., Mukherjee, R., Xi, N., Aslam, D., Dulimarta, H., Xiao, J., Minor, M. and Dan- 

ghi, G. (2002). Climbing the walls, IEEE Robotics and Automation Magazine 9(4): 10-19. 
Unver, O., Uneri, A., Aydemir, A. and Sitti, M. (2006). Geckobot: A gecko inspired climbing 

robot using elastomer adhesives, Proc. of the 2006 IEEE Int. Conf. on Rob. and Aut., 

Orlando, Florida, USA, pp. 2329-2335. 
Wei, T. E., Daltorio, K. A., Gorb, S. N., Southard, L., Ritzmann, R. E. and Quinn, R. D. (2006). 

A small climbing robot with compliant ankles and multiple attachment mechanisms, 

Proc. of the 9th Int. Conf. on Climbing and Walking Robots, Brussels, Belgium, pp. 579- 

585. 
Wikipedia (Last Acessed: October 1, 2009). http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File: 

Gecko_f oot_on_glass . JPG. 
Xiao, J., Xi, N., Xiao, J. and Tan, J. (2003). Multi-sensor referenced gait control of a miniature 

climbing robot, Proc. of the 2003 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intel. Robots and Systems, Las 

Vegas, Nevada, USA, pp. 3656 - 3661. 

22 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Xiao, J., Xiao, J., Xi, N. and Sheng, W. (2004). Fuzzy system approach for task planning and 

control of micro wall climbing robots, Proc. of the 2004 IEEE Int. Conf. on Rob. and Aut., 

pp. 5033 - 5038. 
Yan, W., Shuliang, L., Dianguo, X., Yanzheng, Z., Hao, S. and Xueshan, G. (1999). Development 

and application of wall-climbing robots, Proc. of the 1999 IEEE Int. Conf. on Rob. and 

Aut., Detroit, Michigan, USA, pp. 1207-1212. 
Zhang, H., Zhang, J., Liu, R. and Zong, G. (2004). A novel approach to pneumatic position 

servo control of a glass wall cleaning robot, Proc. of the 2004 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on 

Intel. Robots and Systems, Sendai, Japan, pp. 467-472. 
Zhu, J., Sun, D. and Tso, S.-K. (2003). Application of a service climbing robot with motion 

planning and visual sensing, Journal of Robotic Systems 20(4): 189U-199. 

Mechanical Synthesis for Easy and Fast 
Operation in Climbing and Walking Robots 

Antonio Gonzalez-Rodriguez, Angel G. Gonzalez-Rodriguez 

and Rafael Morales 

University of Castilla-La Mancha, University ofjaen 

Spain 

1. Introduction 

This chapter deals with the importance of the mechanical design in devices used in mobile 

robots. A good synthesis of mechanisms will improve the robot's operation. This idea will 

be explained via two examples. 

In the first example, the mechanical design of a staircase climbing wheelchair will be 

presented. A wheelchair is intended to be a commercial unit, and its control unit must, 

therefore, be robust, efficient and low-cost. 

The second example deals with the mechanical design of an easy-to-operate leg for a mobile 

robot. This is a research project, but easy operation is fundamental if we are to ensure that 

the steps that the leg takes are as rapid as possible, which is of great importance in making 

actual walking robots faster. 

2. Design of a new Design for a Staircase Wheelchair 

2.1 Review of the current approaches 

People with disabilities find that their mobility is improved with the help of powered 
wheelchairs. However, these chairs are often rendered useless by architectural barriers 
whose total elimination from the urban landscape is expensive, if not impossible. These 
barriers appear in many different geometrical shapes, of which staircases are the most 
difficult obstacle to overcome. 

Various designs have been developed to allow a wheelchair climb a stair. One of the first 
and most common solutions are tracks (Yoneda et al., 2001; Lawn et al., 2001) owing to the 
simplicity of their control, and their robustness in adapting to different shapes such as spiral 
staircases. However this solution has important drawbacks: the vehicles that use tracks are 
uncomfortable and of low efficiency when they work in barrier-free environments; a high 
friction coefficient between the edge of the step and the track can deteriorate this edge, and 
the entrance to and exit from the staircase are dangerous and difficult to control. 
Another common solution consists of various wheels attached to a rotation link (Lawn & 
Ishimatzu, 2003). The main problem with this solution is its fixed geometry which cannot be 
adjusted to the step, and the prototype therefore only works satisfactorily with obstacles 

24 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

which are similar to the step used to define the geometry of the rotating link. Further 
problems with this solution are that each of the wheels must have their own transmission, 
which increases the wheelchair's weight, or that the user's resulting trajectory is 
uncomfortable and difficult to control. 

An alternative strategy for the design of the staircase climbing wheelchair will be presented 
in this paper. This strategy is based on splitting the climbing problem into two sub- 
problems (Morales et al., 2004; Morales et al., 2006): single step-climbing of each axle, and 
front and rear axle positioning. Two independent mechanisms have been designed to 
overcome these sub-problems: the climbing mechanism and the positioning mechanism, 
respectively. 

The final mechanism must be able to successfully negotiate all the staircases designed under 
international standards. This paper describes the latest prototype, together with the 
experimental results obtained when the wheelchair climbs different staircases. 

2.2 Description and performance of the mechanical system 

Fig. 1 shows a CAD model of our proposed design. The prototype can be seen in Fig. 2. The 
kinematical scheme of the overall system can be seen in Fig. 3, in which the sub-scheme 
labeled 1 corresponds to the climbing mechanism and the sub-scheme labeled 2 corresponds 
to the positioning mechanism. 

Fig. 1. CAD model of the proposed design 

Mechanical Synthesis for Easy and Fast Operation in Climbing and Walking Robots 

25 

Fig. 2. The staircase climbing mechanism proposed 

2.2.1 Climbing mechanism 

The climbing mechanism allows an axle climb a single step. There is one climbing 

mechanism for the rear axle and another for the front axle. These have been designed to 

adapt to different obstacle geometries, and to guarantee that the system is always in stable 

equilibrium. This last objective is satisfied by permanently ensuring a wide support polygon 

with four contact points, two for each axle. 

When the climbing mechanism reaches a step, a sliding support (1.5 in Fig. 3) is deployed. A 

prismatic joint connects this support to the chassis (2.3) at a fixed angle u. 

A new degree of freedom resulting from a four link mechanism (bars 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 and 1.4 in 

Fig. 3) allows the wheel (1.6) to move backwards to avoid interference from the step. An 

electromagnetic lock cancels this degree of freedom, e.g. when the system is in a barrier-free 

environment. The climbing sequence is presented in Fig. 4. 

26 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 3. Scheme of the entire prototype 

feki^* 

Fig. 4. Climbing sequence for the rear axle 

Upon completion of this process, the sliding support is retracted to prepare the system for 
the following step. The descent process is essentially the same, but the sequence of actions is 
inverted. In this case, the orientation of the wheelchair follows the normal direction of 
movement, and hence, the first operating axle is the front one. 

One important feature of this system is its high payload capacity, which is of great 
importance in the carriage of large patients and heavy batteries. The proposed prototype can 
climb a staircase with a 200kg load (batteries not included). Table 1 shows the weight and 
weight-pay load ratio for other climbing systems. The ratio of the proposed prototype is not 
achieved with actual tracks or rotating wheel clusters. 

Mechanical Synthesis for Easy and Fast Operation in Climbing and Walking Robots 

27 

Vehicule 

Locomotion 
system 

Weight 
(kg) 

Payload/ 
Weight 

Presented vehicle 

Hybrid 
locomotion 

72 

2.53 

XEVIUS (Yoneda et al. 2001 ) 

Single 
Tracks 

65 

0.92 

IBOT 3000 

Wheel 
cluster 

131 

0.86 

Stair-Climbing Wheelchair 

with High Single-Step 
Capability. (Lawn et al 2003) 

Wheel 
cluster 

160 

0.5 

ALDURO 
(Germann et al. 2005) 

Hybrid 
locomotion 

1500 

0.32 

Stair-Climbing Wheelchair in 
Nagasaki (Lawn et al. 2001) 

Double 
tracks 

250 

0.32 

Table 1. Weight and Weight-Payload Ratio for Actual Climbing Vehicles 

2.2. Positioning mechanism 

A closed-loop mechanism has been added to accomplish the positioning task, which is 
responsible for placing the climbing mechanism in such a way that the stability of the 
system is ensured. If only one step needs to be climbed then this is the only task 
accomplished by the positioning mechanism. But if it is necessary for both (rear and front) 
axles to be coordinated in order to climb a staircase, then the positioning mechanism must 
also accommodate the wheel base to the stair tread. Besides a time reduction, the 
coordinated climbing of both axles also facilitates control and increases energy efficiency. 
The positioning mechanism is a closed-loop mechanism, and thus has a good performance 
in terms of rigidity, which consists of three platforms. The central platform (2.1 in Fig. 3) 
houses the seat and the batteries. The two lateral platforms (2.3 and 2.7) house the climbing 
mechanisms. The platforms are joined by two parallelograms (2.2, 2.6, 2.8 and 2.9, in gray) 
that prevent relative rotation between platforms. The system has two degrees of freedom 
which are driven by two linear actuators (2.4-2.5 and 2.10-2.10). These allow the system to 
alter both the vertical and the horizontal distance between the wheels, which allows the 
wheel base to be accommodated to the stair treads. The two degree of freedom system can 
also alter the height and orientation of the seat. 

International standards impose a maximum and minimum width and height for steps. The 
positioning mechanism has been synthesized to maintain system stability for all the 
staircases built according to German Standard DIN 18065 (Fig. 5a). There are four extreme 
positions: 

• N: maximum width and height. In this position the wheels are at maximum 
separation and both parallelograms will be collinear. 

• AT: minimum width and maximum height. This is the staircase with the maximum 
slope (dark gray stairs in Fig. 5a). 

• N": minimum width and height. 

• AT": maximum width and minimum height. This is the staircase with the minimum 
slope (light gray stairs in Fig. 5a). 

28 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

These four points are the corner of a rectangle called an objective rectangle. When one of the 

wheels is in contact with the upper step, if the positioning mechanism is able to place the 

other wheel in the four corners of the objective rectangle, then the accommodation process 

for any staircase is achievable. 

The design of the mechanism is an iterative process to synthesize the parallelograms. This 

process searches for a mechanism which can reach points N and AT (in this case points N" 

and N'" can be also reached, as is shown by the dashed lines in Fig. 5a). 

Fig. 5b shows the vectors used in the synthesis process, where r and s represent the lower 

bars of both parallelograms when the centre of the wheel is at N. When the wheel moves to 

AT these bars are represented by r and s' '. Vectors R2 and R3 belong to the lateral platforms 

and join the centers of the wheels with the joints of the parallelograms. The point P is the 

common joint of the parallelograms with the central platform. 

The first step consists of defining vectors R2 and R3 according to the geometrical restrictions 

of the wheelchair. For example, the vertical component of R2 must be as short as possible 

because a large value implies that the seat is too high. 

L will be defined as L = r + s, therefore r = cL, where c is a constant. The equation of the 

vector-pair r-s can therefore be written as follows (Erdman & Sandor, 1994): 

cL (e la - 1 ) + (1 - c)L (V p - 1 ) = D 

(1) 

where D joins points N and AT. 

Fig. 5. a) Objective Rectangle and b) vectors used for the dimensioning 

In this vectorial equation a, (3, and c are unknown variables. If (3 is taken as a parameter, the 
analytical solution for a can be obtained. 

Mechanical Synthesis for Easy and Fast Operation in Climbing and Walking Robots 

29 

tan or 

(Vy - V 2 X + l)sin p + 2V X V Y cos p - 2V Y 
{ v x ~ V y + l ) cos P + 2V x V y sin P ~ 2V x 

where 

V = 

D 

(2) 

(3) 

The geometry of the system can be easily rebuilt when a is known. The dotted line in figure 
5b represents the position of P for different values of parameter p. The position of P allows 
us to verify the suitability of the mechanism in order to avoid interferences with stairs. If a 
valid solution has not been found the process returns to the first step, and the initial values 
for R2 and R3 are altered. 

The final geometry for Fig. 6 is obtained by repeating the iterative process for the 
positioning mechanism. The figure also shows the workspace (light gray) and objective 
rectangle (dark gray). It is worth mentioning that the wheelchair can climb the staircase 
even when the accommodating process is not carried out. It may thus be reasonable to use a 
narrower objective rectangle in order to obtain a more compact wheelchair. This rectangle 
should be chosen in such a way that the most usual staircases are included. 

z 

Fig. 6. Workspace, objective rectangle and final geometry 

30 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

2.3 Experimental results 

This section shows the experimental results obtained when the wheelchair climbs a single 
step of different heights, and when the wheelchair climbs a three-step staircase. The 3D 
positions of several points of interest have been measured with the Optotrack motion 
system, which is prepared with several infrared markers to record the trajectories of the 
platform and wheels, as is shown in Fig. 7. 

Fig. 7. Position of the markers 

In the first experiment, the wheelchair must separately climb single steps of 0.16m, 0.18m 
and 0.2m, with the aim of studying the horizontality of the seat. 

The horizontality is maintained with a bang-bang control that receives the measurement of 
an inclinometer placed on the rear platform as the fed backward signal. This type of control 
has been chosen owing to the wide dead band of the linear actuators that make the use of 
continuous law control unsuitable. This gives rise to performances with slight oscillations 
due to natural or forced hysteresis in the control (see Fig. 8). Its frequency and amplitude 
can be reduced at the expense of a higher control effort. 

Mechanical Synthesis for Easy and Fast Operation in Climbing and Walking Robots 

31 

Time (s) 

Fig. 8. Inclination of the prototype while climbing a 0.2m height step. 

As Fig. 9 shows, markers 1 and 2 follow the trajectory of the sliding support (1.5 of Fig. 3), 
while marker 3 - the center of the rear wheel - presents a curved trajectory owing to the 
movement of the four link mechanism that allows the wheel to move backwards and avoid 
interference from the step. 

0.16 m step height 

/ 

6 

y 1 

n «s 

/ 

0A 

3 

s 

n ? 

— 

( 

0.1 

Marker 1 
Marker 2 
Marker 3 

l 

0.18 m step height 

i 

r 

-■ 

0.2 m step height 

nfi 

/ 

OF, 

04 

— ' 

3 

0? 

01 

Fig. 9. Climbing of steps with 0.16, 0.18 and 0.2m step height 

In the second experiment, the wheelchair climbs a three-step staircase. In order to maintain 
the center of masses as low as possible, the wheelchair is positioned backwards before 
accomplishing the climb. Figure 10 shows the trajectories regarding the rear axle markers in 
thick gray lines (markers 1, 2 and 3) and those of the front axle markers (4 and 5), in thin 
black lines. As pointed out in Fig. 10, the experiment passes through three stages: 

32 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

B. 

C. 

Climbing of rear axle while front axle remains on the floor. Segments of the 

trajectories that belong to this stage are labeled A in Fig. 10. The amplitude and the 

frequency of the oscillations are wider in this experiment because the hysteresis of 

the control loop has been increased. 

Simultaneous climbing of the rear and front axles. The segments of the trajectories 

that belong to this stage are labeled B in Fig. 10. The accommodation process must be 

performed in order to climb with both axles at once. In this stage the actuators of 

both parallelograms remain inactive and, therefore, the oscillations of the platforms 

are completely eliminated. 

Climbing of front axle with the rear axle on the upper floor. Segments of the 

trajectories that belong to this stage are labeled C in Fig. 10. 

450 

400 

350 

300 

— 250 

c 
o 

200 

150 

100 

50 

50 100 150 200 250 300 
Position X (mm) 

350 400 450 

Fig. 10. Trajectories of rear and front platforms while climbing a three step staircase 

Mechanical Synthesis for Easy and Fast Operation in Climbing and Walking Robots 33 

3. Design of a Fast Controlled Leg for Walking Robots 

3.1 Review of the current trend 

In the present day, and owing to the power and low price of control units, a disregard is 
shown for the mechanical structure design of mobile robot legs. The structures currently 
used are based on serial combinations of joint + link, in which the actuator directly drives 
the joint. These structures are apparently similar to those in the human body or to those of 
certain animals. 
However, these structures have several drawbacks: 

• It is necessary to solve the inverse kinematics in order to establish the particular 

trajectories of each joint, which take the end of the leg to a determinate trajectory. 

• The joint trajectories must be defined point to point, which implies: 

o A control unit for every joint 

o Continuous speed changes during acceleration and braking that 
drastically increase the energy wasted during the trajectory execution. 

• There is a coupling between different joints to perform a determinate movement, 

which forces the designer to select the actuators in order to satisfy the 
requirements of force/ torque and speed for the more demanding movements. 

• The impacts suffered by the end of the leg against the floor or unavoided obstacles 

are directed towards the actuator shafts, which reduces its life time. 
A partial copy of the human or animal structure therefore requires a high response speed 
from the control units, and a complexity that is not observed in the walking process of 
humans or animals. The low efficiency of the walking cycles and over dimensioning of the 
actuators signify that these robots have little autonomy, which is one of their main 
drawbacks. 

In order to overcome this disadvantage, McGeer in (McGeer, 1990 and McGeer, 1990) 
introduced a new design of low-energy robots based on the concept of passive-dynamic 
walker, that could walk downhill a slope without consuming energy, only exchanging 
gravitational energy and kinetic energy, and finally converting them into losses due to 
friction and collisions. 

With the same purpose but with a different approach, a new leg has been designed whose 
mechanical structure decouples the vertical and horizontal movement. A single control unit 
is therefore sufficient to set the trajectory of all the legs through the designation of few (4 or 
5) points per cycle and leg. Furthermore, the motors are driven at a constant speed or 
constant acceleration during the majority of this operation, which increases efficiency. 
Other advantages of the presented design are: 

• It is possible to correctly select dimensioned actuators, with different 
characteristics, for each kind of movement: faster but with a lower load capacity for 
horizontal movements, and with a higher force/ torque but slower for vertical 
movements. 

• The decoupling of the movements simplifies the introduction of muscles with 
adaptable compliance (Gonzalez-Rodriguez et al., 2009), although this kind of 
mechanisms are not ready in present days to be used in active robots, except in the 
case of pneumatic robots (Grizzle et Poulakakis, 2008). 

• A design that does not aim to mimic animal structures allows the actuator to be 
located at the hip, and far from the directions of reaction impact. Therefore and 

34 Climbing and Walking Robots 

respectively, the leg inertia is reduced - in the same way as for industrial robots - 

and the lifetime and reliability are increased. 
It is also possible to include springs, in order to store and recover part of the kinetic energy, 
and therefore reduce energy losses. 

3.2 Mechanical Design to facilitate the control 

If a mechanism is intended to operate solely in obstacle-free terrains, the most suitable 
option is a wheeled vehicle, with higher performance in terms of efficiency, price, 
controllability, speed and pay load. 

However, when the terrain has certain characteristics that impede a wheeled robot from 
circulating, then it will also require some kind of legs, thus necessitating the configuration of 
a hybrid robot or a walking robot. The robot must also perform in an appropriate manner in 
terms of speed and autonomy when operating in obstacle-free terrains, which will probably 
be the most of the time. 

This work presents a new design for a robot leg, whose synthesis searches for the 
simplification of the walking operation control in order to increase the robot's speed and 
efficiency when operating on a surface without obstacles. The structure of the leg and its 
control system must simultaneously be able to overcome obstacles (including steps) that are 
within the workspace of the end of the leg. 

In a first stage, the structure has been designed as a mechanism with two degrees of 
freedom, which allows the end of the leg to move up/ down and forwards/ backwards. The 
(sagital) plane within which the movement is performed will be called the movement plane 
and is parallel to the movement direction and to the vertical line. 

Secondly, and with the aim of maintaining the robot's balance, a third degree of freedom 
has been added which permits movement plane rotation around the direction of the robot's 
movement. The operation of this actuator will not be dealt with in this work, and only the 
two degrees of freedom acting on the movement plane will be described. 
The mechanism has been designed under the restriction that the traction movement, when 
the end of the leg is in contact with the floor, is performed by only one actuator, the other 
actuator being inactive. This implies that when in contact with the floor, the action on the 
traction actuator gives rise to a straight trajectory. To obtain this goal, two four-bar 
mechanisms have been included (see Fig. 11): the first is formed of segments a, b, c and d, 
and the second is formed of f, g, h and i. The input bar of the first four-bar mechanism 
(triangle d f e) is the frame of the second mechanism, and the coupler of the first four-bar 
mechanism (segment c) is joined to the input bar of the second mechanism. 
Horizontal movement (the first DOF) is thus established by acting on the DC motor, and 
vertical movement (the second DOF) is determined by changing the length of the output bar 
b of the first four-bar mechanism, which is accomplished by means of the linear actuator. 
Five precision points along the traction trajectory (Fig. 11a) have been used for the synthesis 
process (Erdmann & Sandor, 1994). The relatively low number of precision points allows us 
to choose the length of certain segments of the mechanism, and those remaining have been 
obtained by imposing that point P reaches the five precision points. These values are listed 
in Fig. 11. 

This solution yields a straight segment for the trajectory of point P, and the traction 
trajectory can therefore be accomplished without the use of the unit control to continuously 
track the movement. The operation of the leg is therefore considerably easier. 

Mechanical Synthesis for Easy and Fast Operation in Climbing and Walking Robots 

35 

Horizontal 
DOF 

Vertical 
DOF 

Imposed lengths 

c 100 mm 
d 400 mm 
g 400 mm 
h 100 mm 
j 400 mm 

I 

Obtained lengths 

a 115 mm 
b 226 mm 
e 336 mm 
f 184 mm 
i 319 mm 

Fig. 11. a) Operation of first DOF of the proposed leg. b) Operation of the second DOF of the 
proposed leg with the starting and obtained lenghts. 

Mechanisms that trace a straight segment have been used in some low cost robots 
(Ottaviano & Ceccarelli, 2002) with only one DOF, but they are not able to overcome 
obstacles, and do not therefore show any advantage over wheeled robots. This ability is 
provided by a second DOF which, in the present design, alters the length of b in Fig. 11. 
With regard to this DOF, a new condition has been imposed: when the frame of the second 
four-bar mechanism (which is responsible for vertical movement) is fixed and the point P is 
in the middle point of the horizontal trajectory, the actuation on the second DOF must give 
rise to a vertical movement of this point P. Vertical and horizontal movement can thus be 
operated quasi-independently, and the length of the remaining segments and the angle of 
the frame can therefore be obtained. 

Fig. 12 shows a scheme that improves the performance of the previous scheme by adding a 
new four bar mechanism (the segments k, I, m and n). The new four bar mechanism has been 
synthesized as a function generator by using four-point Freudenstein equations as is shown 
in (Erdman & Sandor, 1994). The points in the function generation have been chosen in 
order to obtain a constant velocity of point P in the central part of the trajectory, specifically 
within the central 600mm, that is the rated step length of the mechanism. Despite this rated 
value, the leg is capable of taking shorter or longer steps (up to 1 m). 

Far from the conditions in which the synthesis has been made, the trajectories are not 
straight lines and there is some coupling between vertical and horizontal movement. 
However, this coupling does not interfere with the good execution of the step in normal 
operation. A more complicated control of the trajectories is required when it is necessary for 
the leg to overcome an obstacle. 

36 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

(o = cte 

P /-► 

v = cte' 

Imposed length 
k 200 mm 

Obtained lengths 

I 250 mm 

m 177 mm 
n 143 mm 

Fig. 12. A constant angular speed in the actuator is translated into a constant linear speed of 
point P 

3.3. Simulation of the leg kinematics 

In order to check the motion of the end P of the leg, a CAD model of the mechanism has 

been created, and an application to analyze mechanisms has been exported to ADAMS by 

following this geometry. 

In the first step, simulations were performed to generate the workspace of the mechanism, 

shown in Fig. 13. The central line of the figure is the trajectory described by the support P 

when it commences a movement from the third precision point when only the linear 

actuator is being activated. The coordinate origin is at the hip H. As can be seen, the leg is 

able to overcome obstacles of up to 450 mm. 

The validity of the synthesis is proven in Fig. 14, and the deviation of the support point P 

with regard to a straight line is presented in Fig. 14a) which shows variations lower than 

2mm for a step of 0.6m long. This signifies a horizontality error of less than 0.4%, which is 

difficult to achieve by means of conventional robot legs when they are operated at normal 

speed. 

Additionally, Fig. 14b) shows the linear speed of point P when the DC motor is driven at a 

constant speed of 150deg/s, and also for a step of 0.6m. For a vehicle speed of 1.5m/s, the 

speed variations are about 100mm/ s, less than 7%. Although these are perfectly acceptable, 

and are also less than those of other legged robots, these variations between two legs in 

contact with the ground could give rise to the undesirable sliding of one of the legs. 

With this design, since the horizontal movement of the leg can be accomplished by acting on 

a single actuator, the drive card is easily able to impose a torque control (the same value for 

both actuators) rather than a speed control to compensate the movements of both legs 

which, with the help of the inertia, makes the movement smoother and more energetically 

efficient. 

Mechanical Synthesis for Easy and Fast Operation in Climbing and Walking Robots 

37 

-500 

> 

v 

\ 

E 

\ 

v 

£ 

\ 

\ 

ai 

_i 

> 

i 

\ 

[ 

-1100 - 

-600.0 -500.0 -400.0 -300.0 -200.0 -100.0 0.0 100.0 200.0 300.0 400.0 500.0 600.0 

Length (mm) 
Fig. 13. ADAMS model of the leg and its workspace 

1600 

8 1550 

-330 

-999 

r- 

E 

E 
~-1000 

<c 

4% / x 

~ '-1001 

/ 

-1fM9 

E 
E^ 

>*1500 

a 

<D 

-300 

-150 

150 

Length ( mm) 
a) 

300 

1450 

1400 
-300 

<7% ~ 

/ 1 

■ 

-150 

150 

Length ( mm) 

300 

b) 

Fig. 14. a) Vertical position and b) horizontal speed of point P when only the horizontal 
movement motor is actuating 

38 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

3.4. Simulations of the leg performance in a hybrid locomotion robot 

The proposed mechanism was first included in a hybrid motion robot (Fig. 15) in which, as 
in the model described in (Chevallereau et al. 2003), the problem of lateral stability was 
initially disregarded. In our case two rear wheels have been added. The robot therefore 
consists of two articulated legs (those whose structure has been described) and two passive 
wheels located at the ends of another two articulated legs (those at the rear). These rear legs 
are fixed for movements on flat terrain, but will be controlled in future in order to overcome 
obstacles. 

The 3D mechanical CAD program SolidWorks was first used to design the model, which 
was subsequently exported to ADAMS, although the rear legs ending in wheels were 
simplified as simple wheels, as can be seen in Fig. 15. 

The values for stiffness and damping of the rubber support on the ends of the leg and the 
wheel tires have been experimentally obtained by means of a hydraulic actuator load cell. 
The obtained values have been incorporated into the ADAMS model in order to accomplish 
the dynamic simulation of the hybrid motion robot. 

Actuator for horizontal movement 

Fig. 15. ADAMS model of the hybrid locomotion robot used to test the proposed leg design 

Figures Fig. 16 and Fig. 17 show, respectively, the speed patterns imposed on the linear 
actuator responsible for the vertical movement and on the DC motors for the horizontal 
movement. A transient stage can be seen at the beginning of the simulation with regard to 
the robot acceleration. 

Mechanical Synthesis for Easy and Fast Operation in Climbing and Walking Robots 

39 

As can be seen, both the trajectories and the calculations involved are very simple. The 
velocity of the chassis center of mass is presented in Fig. 18, and has oscillations of less than 
10% of the advance speed. 

50.0 

25.0 

Velocity of vertical joints 

i 

u 

v 0.0 

55 

o> 

o. 

CO 

-25.0 

-50.0 

8 

1— 

■Right leg 
•Left leg 

• — ; 

1 -■■ 

1 

* 

, 

■ 

_ 

j 

6.0 

9.0 
Time (sec) 

12.0 

15.0 

Fig. 16. Speed pattern for the actuator responsible for the vertical movement. The first 
patterns corresponds to the acceleration transient 

250.0 

175.0 

100.0 

25.0 
0.0 

Velocity of horizontal joints 

-50.0 

_JL 

[ - - - -Left leg J 

A 

* 

I f 

A 

# 

r i 

■ i 

A 

■ 
f 

i 
r 

i 

r\ 

■ 

J-A 

I 

i 1 

— V 

* 

V 

■— • — 

— / 

.t 

3.0 

6.0 

9.0 
Time (sec) 

12.0 

15.0 

Fig. 17. Speed pattern for the actuator responsible for the horizontal movement 

40 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

1 

E. 

50,0 

0.0 
-25.0 

-100.0 

-175.0 

Velocity of chassis 

-250.0 

-A 

3.0 

6.0 

9.0 
Time (sec) 

12.0 

15.0 

Fig. 18. Velocity of the robot chassis during acceleration and normal operation 

Finally, the motor torques required to obtain the aforementioned speed patterns are shown 
in Fig. 19. The force for the vertical actuator appears as a dashed purple line, while the 
torque for the horizontal actuator is a solid blue line. The control signals for the actuators 
have been obtained through a closed loop PI controller, where the output speeds have been 
fed backward. 

In order to perform a more realistic simulation, the control signals have been saturated to 
the maximum currents that the power electronic control units which will eventually be 
installed are able to supply. 

10000.0 

5000.0 

Forces and torques 

I 

0.0 

-5000.0 

-10000.0 

^ ^Fonce (vertical joint) 

i 
1 

S 

| 

A 

N 1 

_ A 

^A 

i I— 

^ 

ps 

y 

- ~\-, 

. 1 

t/V 

tA 

J 

,.A 

- A 

** < 

*" 

> 

k 

4.0 

6.5 

9.0 
Time (sec) 

11.5 

14.0 

Fig. 19. Force and torque exerted by the actuators responsible for vertical and horizontal 
movements 

Mechanical Synthesis for Easy and Fast Operation in Climbing and Walking Robots 41 

4. Conclusions 

Two different designs have been presented that contribute new approaches towards existing 
mechanical schemes. 

The first prototype is a stair-climbing wheelchair designed with a new approach, based on 
splitting the stair-climbing process into two sub-problems: the ascent of each single step, 
and the positioning of the rear and front axles. 

Each sub-problem is solved by using two independent mechanisms which are linked to 
create the final wheelchair. This new wheelchair has been modeled, built and tested. Its 
main features are: 

a) The ability to climb any staircase built according to international standards. 

b) Very high capacity load and weight ratio. 

c) Stable equilibrium is guaranteed. 

The second prototype consists in a new design for a leg to be used in legged or hybrid 

robots. 

The characteristics pursued and the advantages of the proposed structure are the following: 

• The horizontal and vertical movement of the support point are decoupled, at least 
when in contact with the ground. 

• The control task is very simple, with only two vertical movement commands and 
three horizontal movement commands per step and leg being necessary. 

• The low number of movement commands leads to a high speed and high efficiency 
performance. 

• The legged structure allows the robot to overcome obstacles, although in this case 
the control is not so direct, and the movements are not so fast and efficient, owing 
to the fact that the trajectory must be imposed not only during the traction but also 
during the flight stage. 

• The motors and actuators can be independently selected for the vertical and 
horizontal movements, which allows the designer to select the gearboxes in order 
to achieve a higher speed for the horizontal movement and the load capacity for 
the vertical movement, without increasing the actuator capacity, and therefore 
without increasing its volume, height or price. 

• A torque control rather than a speed control can be accomplished which facilitates 
the synchronization between the legs and smoothes the movements. 

In the case of both designs, the authors wish to point out the importance of a suitable 
mechanical scheme, fitted to the problem to be solved, in the global design of a robot. This 
allows the system to increase its efficiency and performance, discharging the unit control for 
an unnecessary task. 

42 Climbing and Walking Robots 

5. References 

Chevallereau, C; Abba, G.; Aoustin, Y.; Plestan, F.; Westervelt, E. R.; Canudas-De-Wit, C; 
Grizzle & J. W. (2003). RABBIT: a testbed for advanced control theory. Control 
Systems Magazine, IEEE. Volume 23, Issue 5, (October 2003) pp 57 - 79, ISSN 
0272-1708 

Erdman, A. G.; Sandor, G. N. (1994). Mechanism Design: Analysis and Synthesis, Prentice-Hall, 
ISBN 978-0132677820, New Jersey 

Germann, D.; Hiller, M. & Schramm, D. (2005). Design and control of the quadruped 
walking robot ALDURO. Proceedings of 22nd International Symposium on Automation 
and Robotics in Construction, ISARC 2005, pp 1-6. Ferrara, Italy, September 2005. 

Gonzalez-Rodriguez, A.; Nava, N. & Gonzalez-Rodriguez, A. G. (2009). Design and 
validation of a novel actuator with adaptable compliance for application in human- 
like robotics. Industrial Robots. Vol. 36, No. 1, (2009), pp. 84-90, ISSN 0143-991X 

Grizzle, J. & Poulakakis, I. (2008) Delft Pneumatic Bipeds. Control Systems Magazine, IEEE. 
Vol.28, no.4, (August 2008), pp.99-101, ISSN 0272-1708 

Lawn, M. J.; Sakai, T.; Kuroiwa, M. & Ishimatzu T. (2001). Development and practical 
application of a stairclimbing wheelchair in Nagasaki. Journal of Human Friendly 
Welfare Robotic Systems. Vol. 2, No.2, (2001) pp 33-39, ISSN 1598-3250 

Lawn, M. J. & Ishimatzu, T. (2003). Modeling of a Stair-Climbing Wheelchair Mechanism 
with High Single-Step Capability. IEEE Transaction on Neural Systems and 
Rehabilitation Engineering, Vol. 11, No. 3, (September 2003) pp 323-332, ISSN 1534- 
4320 

McGeer T., Passive dynamic walking, International journal of Robotics Research, Vol. 9, No. 2, 
(1990) pp. 62-82, ISSN 0278-3649 

McGeer, T. (1990) Passive walking with knees, Proceedings of IEEE Robotics & Automation 
Conference, pp. 1640-1645, ISBN 1050-4729, Cincinnati, Ohio, May 1990 

Morales, R.; Gonzalez, A.; Feliu, V. & Pintado, P. (2004). Kinematics of a New Staircase 
Climbing Wheelchair. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Climbing and 
Walking Robots and the Support Technologies for Mobile Machines (CLAWAR 2004), pp 
249-264, ISBN 978-3-540-22992-6, September 2004, Springer Berlin 

Morales, R.; Feliu, V.; Gonzalez, A. & Pintado, P. (2006) Kinematic Model of a New Staircase 
Climbing Wheelchair and its Experimental Validation. International Journal of 
Robotic Research, Vol 25, No. 9, (2006), pp 825-841, ISSN 0278-3649 

Ottaviano E. & Ceccarelli M. (2002). Optimal design of CaPaMan (Cassino Parallel 
Manipulator) with a specified orientation workspace, Robotica vol. 20, No.2 (March 
2002), pp.159-166, ISSN 0263-5747 

Yoneda, K.; Ota, Y. & Hirose, S. (2001). Development of a Hi-Grip Stair Climbing Crawler 
with Hysteresis Compliant Blocks, Proceedings of 4th International Conference on 
Climbing and Walking Robots (CLAWAR 2001), pp. 569-576, ISBN 1-86058-365-2, 
Karlsruhe, Germany, September, 2001, Professional Engineering Publishing, Suffolk 
UK 

A Wheel-based Stair-climbing Robot 
with a Hopping Mechanism 

Koki Kikuchi, Naoki Bushida, Keisuke Sakaguchi, Yasuhiro Chiba, 
Hiroshi Otsuka, Yusuke Saito, Masamitsu Hirano and Shunya Kobayashi 

Chiba Institute of Technology 
Japan 

1. Introduction 

In this chapter, we introduce a stair-climbing robot developed in our laboratory. This robot 
consists basically of two body parts connected by springs, and hops as a result of the 
vibration of a two-degrees-of-freedom (2-DOF) system. The excellent combination between 
the frequencies of the robotic body vibration and the tread-riser interval of stairs enables a 
small and simple robot fast stair climbing, soft landing, and energy saving. 
In an attempt to give the robot mobility in an environment such as an office building having 
steps and stairs, various mechanisms have been proposed and developed. Each one of 
which has different characteristics. For example, wheel-based robots are very simple in 
terms of both mechanical design and control, and they can travel quickly and stably. But 
their size tends to be big for climbing stairs, as they cannot surmount a riser higher than 
their wheel radius. On the other hand, although crawler-type robots can climb over a riser 
higher than a wheel-based robot, they are slow and noisy. Typical examples of crawler-type 
robots are TAQT (Hirose et al., 1992) that can carry a human and Kenaf (Yoshida et al., 2007) 
for rescue operations. Legged robots, especially humanoid ones, are well suited for climbing 
stairs, but require many DOFs and complex control. Honda's ASIMO (ASIMO OFFICIAL 
SITE), AIST's HRP (Harada et al., 2006) and Waseda University's legged robot (Sugahara et 
al., 2007) are good examples. In addition, the hybrids of these types have been proposed and 
have improved upon mutual demerits. Chari-be (Nakajima et al., 2004), with two wheels 
and four legs, travels quickly on its wheels over flat terrain, and climbs using its legs in 
rough terrain such as a step and stairs. A biped-type robot with a wheel at the tip of its legs 
(Matsumoto et al., 1999) climbs stairs smoothly. RHex (Altendorfer et al., 2001) has six 
compliant rotary legs and travels speedily not only up and down stairs, but also even 
uncertain terrain such as a swamp. Moreover, modular robots such as an articulated snake- 
like robot and special mechanisms for stairs have also been proposed. Yim's snake-like robot 
(Yim et al., 2001) climbs stairs, transforming its own loop form into a stair shape. These 
excellent mechanisms have improved the manoeuvrability of the robot for rough terrain, but 
as most are general-purpose robots for rough terrain, a more specialized mechanism must 
be developed if we focus solely on stair-climbing ability in an office building. 

44 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

From this point of view, we have developed a stair-climbing robot specifically for use in an 
office building (Sakaguchi et al, 2007, Asai et al. 2008 & Kikuchi et al, 2008). Our robot 
cannot climb stairs with various-height or irregular risers smoothly, but it does climb stairs 
with a priori determined regular risers rapidly (less than 1.0 s per step), softly (less than the 
impact at takeoff, at the landing point), and economically. Furthermore, the mechanical 
design and control are quite simple, and additionally the height of the robot is almost the 
same as the common stair riser. These features are very important for practical tasks such as 
monitoring the situation in an office. Here, we introduce the hopping mechanism and 
property, and show the experimental result of the fast stair climbing and soft-landing. 

2. Hopping mechanism and robotic design 

The mathematical hopping model consists of two mass points, m\ and mi, connected by a 
spring, as shown in Fig. 1. The lower mass point, mi, hops if, and only if, the lifting force 
provided by the spring, k(z\-zi), and the wire, T w , exceeds the force of gravity on the lower 
mass, mig. The trajectories of the two mass points during hopping evolve based on the 
reduced mass, the mass ratio between the upper and lower masses, spring constant, k, the 
friction of the shaft, and stored spring energy. Figure 2 shows a manufactured robot with 
this hopping mechanism. The robot consists of an upper body part (Body 1) and a lower 
body part (Body 2) connected by four springs and a wire. Here, the upper body part has a 
CPU (H8/tiny) for control, a receiver, a position sensitive detector (PSD), a reel with a gear 
and a motor, a solenoid, and batteries (CPU: 7.4V, motor: 30V for the reel and 22.2V for the 
travel, and solenoid: 44.4V). The lower body part has two motors for translational travel, 
four 56-mm diameter wheels, four shafts and two acceleration sensors for the z direction. 
The robot first stores the spring energy by reeling in the wire. The reel mechanism is then 
detached by the solenoid, and the robot hops by releasing the stored spring energy. Here, 
body parts 1 and 2 correspond to the mass points of the two-dimensional mathematical 
model shown in Fig. 1. The robot is 370 mm tall, 155 mm wide and 140 mm long. Also, the 
robot has no suspension to act as a damper, as we scrutinize the impact acceleration of body 
parts. 

Wive 

Fig. 1. Two-dimensional mathematical model of hopping mechanism 

A Wheel-based Stair-climbing Robot with a Hopping Mechanism 

45 

Reel mechanism 

Body part 1 

Shaft 

Motor 

370mm 

Acceleration sensor 

Motor 

Body part 2 

Fig. 2. Wheel-based robot with hopping mechanism 

3. Mathematical model for simulation 

The robot is modeled simply as a 2-DOF spring-mass system. If the posture of the robot can 
be neglected, the equations of motion are given by 

(m 1 +m 2 ) x{' =/ x (la) 

mi zi" + k(z\ - z 2 ) = - mig - T w - ji t F{ (lb) 

m 2 z 2 " + k(z2 - zi) = - m2g + T w + fi t F{ + N 
where (x\, zi) and (x 2l zi) are coordinates for each body part (zi=Z2 at the natural length of the 
spring), m\ and m 2 are the masses of body parts 1 and 2, k is the spring constant, f x is the 
motor force for horizontal travel, fi t Fi is the friction of the shaft (the magnitude of Ff is 
determined by the pilot experiment and the sign is determined by the relative vertical 
velocity between the two masses, d(z2-zi)/dt), and N is the reaction of the ground. The 
ground is simply modeled by a spring and a damper, as shown Fig. 1. T w , the wire tension is 
a positive value or zero for tensional or relaxant conditions, respectively. Note that as the 
posture of the robot is neglected for simplification, x\ is always equal to x 2 . 
Here, the condition for takeoff of lower mass, z% is given by 

m 2 g < k(zi - zi) + T w - fi t F f (2) 

Assuming that the friction of shaft, ^ t Ff, is neglected (Ff=0) and that we do not control the 
wire tension (T w =0) during hopping, the trajectories of the two masses at the time t after 
takeoff, i.e., during hopping (f x =0, N=0, and Z2>0), are as follows, 

46 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

xi = X2= v x t +D (3a) 

Z! = h M/rm sin(a) t + cp) - g (t - T) 2 /2 + C (3b) 

z 2 =- h M/m 2 sin(co t + cp) - g (t - T) 2 /2 + C 

co = (fc/M)°-5, M=l/(l/mi + l/m 2 ) (3c) 

where z? x is the horizontal velocity at takeoff, D is the starting point of takeoff, h, cp, T, and C 
are constants determined by the initial conditions, co is the angular frequency, and M is the 
reduced mass between the two masses. Hence, the horizontal velocity is constant during 
hopping. The air resistance is neglected. The first terms on the right side of the z equations, 
Eq. (3b), represent vibration caused by the two body parts. Although two natural 
frequencies must exist because the system has a 2-DOF configuration, the lower natural 
frequency is zero in this case. The second terms on the right side of the z equations represent 
the parabolic motion of the center of mass (COM). Consequently, the hopping motion of the 
robot after takeoff is represented by the combination of the vibration of the mass points and 
the parabolic motion of the COM. Hence, the point at which the velocity in the z direction of 
the vibration of body part 2 and that of the parabolic motion of the COM are canceled out, is 
the soft-landing point. For later discussion, we define "soft-landing" as a landing in which 
the vertical velocity of the lower body part is zero (z2 r ^0), the acceleration is zero (z2" w 0), 
and the third differential is zero or negative (z2'"<0) at landing height, H (where H is the 
riser height). Figure 3 shows two typical examples of the trajectories of the mass points, z\ 
and z% during hopping. The red dashed line depicts the hopping for the higher riser, and 
the blue solid line is that for the lower riser. The points "A" and "B" are ideal landing points, 
i.e., mathematical stationary and inflection points. These robots can softly climb stairs with 
risers of H = 0.1 [m] and H = 0.2 [m], respectively. Note that the closer the Z2 ,,r is to zero, the 
lower the landing impact for noise, because the lower body part can fly parallel to the tread. 

0.2 0.3 

Distance[m] 

Fig. 3. Two typical examples of trajectories of mass points, Z\ and Zi, during hopping 

A Wheel-based Stair-climbing Robot with a Hopping Mechanism 47 

4. Hopping properties 

In this section, we present the characteristics during the hopping motion. The trajectories of 
the robot change, depending mainly on passive parameters such as reduced mass, the mass 
ratio between the upper and lower masses, and the spring constant and active parameters 
such as initial spring contraction, wire tension, and horizontal traveling driving force. 
Passive parameters are mechanical design parameters and should be designed a priori for 
the specification of the stairs in an office building. On the other hand, active parameters are 
control parameters and can be changed in accordance with a local irregular step, etc. 
We first show the frequency characteristic, one of the characteristics of the passive 
parameters, during the hopping motion. Figure 4 shows the relation between the reduced 
mass and the angular frequency for three spring constants. Here, the lines depict the results 
obtained by Eq. (3c) and the points are the results performed by 10 hopping experiments for 
each point. The passive parameters are as follows: The spring constants, k, are 800, 1,200, 
and 1,600 N/m. In the experiments, reduced masses, M, of 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7 and 0.8 kg are 
used. Here, when the reduced mass is 0.6 kg and the mass ratio is 2.0, the masses of the 
upper and lower body parts mean 1.8 kg and 0.9 kg, respectively, and the total mass is 2.7 
kg. This figure implies that the angular frequency can almost be controlled by co in Eq. (3c), 
that is, the reduced mass and the spring constant, because, although the experimental values 
became slightly higher than the simulation results in accordance with the increase in the 
spring constant, the errors can be estimated simply from the figure and the standard 
deviations were also very small. 

Second, we show the trajectories of body parts 1 and 2 for mass ratios, mi/ mi, of 0.5 (Case A) 
and 4.0 (Case B), as two typical examples obtained in numerical simulations (Fig. 5). Here, 
the reduced mass, M, is constant at 0.7 kg, the spring constant, k, is 2,000 N/m, and the 
initial contraction of the spring, h, is 0.1 m. The thin lines represent body part 1 and the bold 
lines are body part 2. The dashed thin lines represent the velocities of body part 1 and the 
dashed bold lines are the velocity of boby part 2. This figure shows that the amplitudes of 
body parts 1 and 2 depend on the mass ratio, as shown by the vibration term in Eq. (3b). 
That is, if the reduced mass is constant, the amplitude of body part 1 is large when the mass 
of body part 2 is large, and the amplitude of body part 2 is large when the mass of body part 
1 is large. In addition, the hopping height of the COM increases with decreasing the mass of 
body part 2, mi. Furthermore, the possible points of soft-landing (z2' w 0, zi'^0, and zi" <0) 
exist in the neighborhood of crests of the vibration of body part 2, as shown in Cases A and 
B. Note that we cannot choose the highest hopping point, i.e., a vertex, as the landing point, 
because the robot has a physical body length, L, and cannot land both the front and rear 
wheels on the stairs simultaneously. Additionally, we also cannot reduce the mass of body 
part 2 dramatically, as a main drive unit such as a motor is mounted on body part 2. 
Next, as active hopping characteristics, Fig. 6 shows examples of the hopping motion for the 
initial contractions of the spring of h = 0.070, 0.085, and 0.100 [m]. Here, the reduced mass, M, 
is 0.7 kg, the mass ratio, m\/ mi, is 2.0, the spring constant, k, is 1,600 N/m and the horizontal 
velocity, v x , is 1.2 m/s. From this, we find that with the increase in the initial contraction of 
the spring, h, the temporal axis of the parabolic motion of the COM, T, is shifted to the right, 
the hopping height of the COM is increased, but the angular frequency, co, is unchanged. 
Also, we can simply find that the spatio-frequency represented by x-z coordinates can be 
controlled by the horizontal velocity v x . The slower the horizontal velocity, the higher the 
spatio-frequency. The correspondence between the spatio-frequencies of the lower body 

48 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

part trajectory and the stair configuration, i.e., the tread-riser interval, enables economic and 
stable stair climbing by the robot. Moreover, as the wire can pull the body parts mutually, 
the robot can actively control the possible point of soft landing by the wire tension. 

- - k=1600[N/m] (Simulation) 

k=1200[N/m] (Simulation) 

k=800[N/m] (Simulation) 

♦ k=1600[N/m](Hardware) 
a k=1200[N/m](Hardware) 
■ k=800[N/m] (Hardware) 

0.2 0.3 0.4 0.S 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 1.1 1.2 

Reduced mass: M [kg] 

Fig. 4. Relation between reduced mass and angular frequency for different spring constants 

Case A: mi/m2=0.5 

Zl[m] 

Z2[m] 

/~~\ 

- Z'l[m/s] 

/ \ 

- ■ ■ Z'2[m/s] 

. 

1 /\^\ 

/ 

. 

/ . A. -A' 

\ 

A/ \ 

/ 

\ *'/- 

3^ 

\ 

^ 

Time[sec] 

CaseB: mi/m 2 ^k0 

yV *, Vertex 

Zl[m] 

Z2[m] 

^^. Zl[m/s] ■ 

Ns"- ■ Z2[m/s] 

v // ^ -yC.x -... 

\ 

y /'" . 

'"A 

Timefsec] 

Fig. 5. Trajectories of mass and velocities: in Case A, the mass ratio is 0.5, and in Case B, the 
mass ratio is 4.0 

A Wheel-based Stair-climbing Robot with a Hopping Mechanism 

49 

0.2 0.3 0.4 

Distance [m] 

Fig. 6. Trajectories of mass points 1 and 2 during hopping for different initial spring 
contractions 

o.? 

0.4 

■a. 
z 

K 0.2 

0.1 

0,0 

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0,4 

Distance [tn] 

0.5 

Fig. 7. Trajectories of two body parts and impact accelerations during hopping motion 

5. Demonstration of stair climbing 

5.1 Climbing up a step 

We first demonstrate fast and soft climbing up a riser 0.21 m in height. From the above 
discussion, we can control the landing point and condition by adjusting the mechanical 
design and control parameters. Here, we set the parameters as follows: the reduced mass, M, 
of 0.55 kg, the mass ratio, mi/mi, of 1.32, the spring constant, k, of 1,600 N/m, the initial 
contraction of the spring, h, of 0.13 m, and the horizontal velocity, v x , of 1.2 m/s. Note that 
the value of 0.21 m is 73 times higher than the wheel radius of the robot and corresponds 
approximately to the common riser height of stairs. Also, the contraction of the spring, h, is 

50 Climbing and Walking Robots 

measured by the PSD with a sampling time of 30 ms. Figure 7 shows the trajectories of the 
robot during the hopping motion and the impact accelerations obtained from the front and 
rear sensors mounted in the lower body part. The impact acceleration at the moment of 
landing was approximately 8 G, which was less than the maximum acceleration during 
takeoff, 19 G, and was close to that experienced during flight, i.e., almost 10 G. As the 
impact acceleration by free-fall from the maximum hopping height to the step (Ha shown in 
Fig. 7) was approximately 33 G, the soft-landing of this robot reduced the impact by 76%. 
However, high impact acceleration at the moment of takeoff was observed, unfortunately. 
This is not due to impact with the ground, but rather due to the plate deflection of body part 
2. The actual acceleration of lower body part at the moment of takeoff was less than 10 G. 
We need to improve the geometrical moment of inertia of body part 2. Note that we realized 
fast and soft step climbing by 0.27 m in height. 

5.2 Climbing up a flight of stairs 

Next, we demonstrate fast and soft stair climbing. The trick in stair climbing is to 
synchronize the spatio-frequency of the stairs, i.e., the tread-riser intervals, and the body 
vibration. It is simple and easy in a mathematical model, but it is not in practice. Figure 8 
shows three processes for continuous hopping-takeoff, landing, and reeling in-and the 
tread length required for each hop. The horizontal traveling distance during these three 
processes, the required tread length, can be quite simply controlled by the horizontal 
velocity v x , if the robot length, L, is zero. However, the following constraints exist in practice. 
First, after takeoff, the front wheels must jump up to the edge of the step (takeoff phase in 
Fig. 8), next, before landing, the rear wheels must clear the edge of the step (landing phase 
in Fig. 8), and then the robot must reel in the wire for next hopping (reeling-in phase in Fig. 
8). When the horizontal traveling distance during these three phases, Dt+Di+Dr, is equal to 
or less than the tread length, the robot can climb a flight of stairs. Thus, this is the minimum 
required tread length, and the shorter, the better. From these constraints, the robot must 
jump up to the riser height, H, at t = Dj/v x and the minimum landing phase distance, Dl, is 
equal to the body length, L. Also, since the reeling-in phase distance, Dr, depends only on 
the motor torque to reel in the wire, the larger the motor torque, the shorter the reeling-in 
phase distance. However, as the exceedingly high-power motor makes the upper mass 
heavy and the wire tension strong, it lifts up the lower body part. Additionally, although the 
reeling-in phase distance can be shortened by reeling in the wire before landing, the control 
of the soft landing point becomes difficult as the passive vibration characteristics change. 
Thus, the wire is reeled in after landing for simplification in this experiment. 
Figure 9 shows an example of trajectories of two body parts (blue and red lines) and impact 
accelerations (green and orange lines) based on the following parameters: the reduced mass, 
M, of 0.79 kg, the mass ratio, mi/nti, of 2.17, the spring constant, k, of 2,000 N/m, the initial 
spring constriction, h, of 0.12 m, and the horizontal velocity, v x , of 0.90 m/s for the riser 
height, H, of 0.20 m. Additionally, Fig. 10 shows stroboscopic pictures of continuous 
hopping to climb two steps. As shown in Fig. 9, the required tread length was 0.74 m (Note 
that to avoid clashing into the riser wall, a margin safety of 2.1 was introduced. The required 
tread length obtained by the numerical simulation was 0.35 m). The impact accelerations 
were 28 G and 37 G for first and second takeoffs and 10 G and 6 G for first and second 
landings. The impact acceleration at the moment of landing was less than that during flight. 

A Wheel-based Stair-climbing Robot with a Hopping Mechanism 

51 

Also, the stair climbing time per step was 0.77 s. To shorten the required tread length is one 
of the future tasks as the common tread length is almost 0.4 m. 

Required tread length 

(n-l) th 
hopping 

Takeoff phase Landing phase Reeling-in phase 

n th hopping 

Fig. 8. Hopping processes and required tread length 

(n+l) th 
Jhopping 

0.6 0.8 

Distance [in] 

Fig. 9. Trajectories of two body parts and impact acceleration during stair climbing 

52 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 10. Stroboscopic images of stair climbing 

6. Demonstration of step descending 

Finally, we demonstrate fast and soft descending of steps 0.20 m in height. The hopping 
mechanism is almost the same as for climbing. However, the degree of difficulty is quite 
different. As mentioned in Section 3, the soft-landing point is the location at which the 
velocity in the z-direction of vibration of lower body part, -hMco/mi cos(cot+cp), and that of 
the parabolic motion of the COM, -g(t-T), are canceled out. Here, although the maximum of 
the former is hM(o/m2, the latter becomes a large negative value with time, t, because of 
descending. In climbing, as the robot lands near the top of the parabolic motion, as shown in 
Fig. 8, and the descending velocity by parabolic motion is low, there are many parameters, 
hMco/mi cos((Dt+q>), which can cancel out the descending velocity. In contrast, in descending, 
as the robot lands considerably below the top of the parabolic motion, as the dashed line 
shows in Fig. 11, and the descending velocity is very high, the parameters, hMcD/mi 
cos(cot+cp), which can cancel it out, decrease dramatically. Thus, we use another technique in 
descending. Hence, the robot does not jump up, but glides from the step horizontally, starts 
to vibrate by detaching the reel mechanism while descending, and then lands softly, as the 
solid line shows in Fig. 11. This method requires posture control at takeoff, but decreases the 
descending velocity by the parabolic motion on landing and makes the required tread 
length short. 

Figure 12 shows the trajectories of two body parts (blue and red lines) and impact 
accelerations (green and orange lines) during the hopping motion. Here, the parameters are: 
the reduced mass, M, of 0.74 kg, the mass ratio, mi/mi, of 2.04, the spring constant, k, of 

A Wheel-based Stair-climbing Robot with a Hopping Mechanism 

53 

1,200 N/m, the initial contraction of the spring, h, of 0.11 m, and the horizontal velocity, v x , 
of 1.0 m/s. The impact acceleration at the moment of landing was approximately 14 G, 
which was close to that experienced during flight, i.e., almost 10 G. As the impact 
acceleration under free-fall from the riser height to the step was 77 G, the soft-landing of this 
robot reduced the impact by 82%. Figure 13 shows stroboscopic images of step descending. 
The posture at takeoff was controlled by a wheelie. 

Top of the parabolic motion 

K 

H 

\ O -'-' 

Landing point 

Fig. 11. Two methods for descending stairs 

-HMay/mi cos(a)t+(p) 

-g(t-T) 

0.5 

0.4 

0.3 

■r 

0.2 

0.1 

i\A) 

Landing point 

f\hhpj\sw?*~?*±v^f^^ 

- Tr;ijectory(Bodyl) 

- Triijectory(B<nly2) 
Iinpnrt nccelei :itioii(Frout) 
Impact accelerntioiifRenr) 

0.0 

0.1 

0.2 03 

DistJMKe[m] 

Fig. 12. Trajectories of the two body parts and impact accelerations during hopping motion 

54 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

1 1 

Fig. 13. Stroboscopic images of step descending 

7. Conclusion 

We introduced a wheel-based stair-climbing robot with a hopping mechanism for stair- 
climbing. The robot, consisting of two body parts connected by springs, climbed stairs 
quickly, softly, and economically by using the vibration of a two-degrees-of-freedom system. 
In the future, we intend to shorten the required tread length by controlling the wire tension 
and minimizing the body length to realize a practical stair-climbing robot. 

A Wheel-based Stair-climbing Robot with a Hopping Mechanism 55 

8. References 

Altendorfer, R.; Moore, E.Z.; Komsuoglu, H.; Buehler, M.; Brown, H.; McMordie, D.; Saranli, 
U.; Full, R. & Koditschek, D.E. (2001). A Biologically Inspired Hexapod Runner, 
Autonomous Robots, Vol. 11, (month 2001), pp. 207 - 213 

Asai, Y.; Chiba, Y.; Sakaguchi, K.; Sudo, T.; Bushida, N.; Otsuka, H.; Saito, Y. & Kikuchi, K. 
(2008). Wheel-Based Stair-climbing Robot with Hopping Mechanism - 
Demonstration of Continuous Stair Climbing Using Vibration-, Journal of Robotics 
and Mechatronics, Vol. 20, No. 2, Apr. 2008, pp. 221-227 

ASIMO OFFICIAL SITE : http://www.honda.co.jp/ASIMO/ 

Harada, K.; Kajita, S.; Kaneko, K. & Hirukawa, H. (2006). Dynamics and Balance of a 
Humanoid Robot during Manipulation Tasks, IEEE Transaction on Robotics, 2006, 
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 568-575. 

Hirose, S.; Sensu, T. & Aoki, S. (1992). The TAQT Carrier: A Practical Terrain- Adaptive 
Quadru-Track Carrier Robot, Proceedings of IEEE/RSJ International conference on 
Intelligent Robots and Systems, July 1992, pp. 2068-2073, Tokyo 

Kikuchi, K.; Sakaguchi, K.; Sudo, T.; Bushida, N.; Chiba, Y. & Asai, Y. (2008). A study on 
wheel-based stair-climbing robot with hopping mechanism, MECHANICAL 
SYSTEMS AND SIGNAL PROCESSING (MSSP), Aug. 2008, Vol. 22, Issue 6, 1316- 
1326, ELSEVIER 

Matsumoto, O.; Kajita, S.; Saigo, M. & Tani, K; (1999). Biped-type leg- wheeled robot, 
Advanced Robotics, 13(3), Oct. 1999, pp.235-236. 

Nakajima, S.; Nakano, E.; & Takahashi, T.; (2007). Motion Control Technique for Practical 
Use of a Leg-Wheel Robot on Unknown Outdoor Rough Terrains, Proceedings of 
IEEE/RSJ International conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, vol.1, 
(Month 2004), pp. 1353-1358 

Sakaguchi, K.; Sudo, S.; Bushida, N.; Chiba, Y.; Asai, Y. & Kikuchi, K. (2007). Wheel-Based 
Stair-climbing Robot with Hopping Mechanism -Fast Stair-climbing and Soft- 
landing by Vibration of 2-DOF system-, Journal of Robotics and Mechatronics, Vol. 
19, No. 3, Jun. 2007, pp. 258-263 

Sugahara, Y.; Carbone, G.; Hashimoto, K.; Ceccarelli, M.; Lim, H. & Takanishi, A. (2007). 
Experimental Stiffness Measurement of WL-16RII Biped Walking Vehicle during 
Walking Operation, Journal of Robotics and Mechatronics, Vol. 19, No. 3, Jun. 2007, 
pp. 272-280 

Yim, M. H.; Homans, S. B. & Roufas, K. D. (2001). Climbing with snake-like robots, IF AC 
Workshop on Mobile Robot Technology, Korea, May 2001, pp. 21-22, Jejudo. 

Yoshida, T.; Koyanagi, E.; Tadokoro, E.; Yoshida, K.; Nagatani, K.; Ohno, K.; Tsubouchi, T.; 
Maeyama, S.; Noda, I.; Takizawa, O. & Hada, Y. (2007). A High Mobility 6-Crawler 
Mobile Robot "Kenaf", Proceedings of 4th International Workshop on Synthetic 
Simulation and Robotics to Mitigate Earthquake Disaster (SRMED2007), July, 2007, 
p. 38, Atlanta 

56 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Motion Control of a Four-wheel-drive 
Omnidirectional Wheelchair with High Step 

Climbing Capability 

Masayoshi Wada 

Dept. of Mechanical Systems Engineering 
Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology 

Japan 

1. Introduction 

In recent years, aging problem has been arising to be among the most serious social issues 
world wide, especially in some European and Asian countries, involving Japan. It is 
reported in Japan that the population of over 65 years old would reach 30,000,000 in 2012 
and grow over 30% of total population in 2025 [1]. 

Electric wheelchairs, personal mobiles, scooters are currently commercially available not 
only for handicapped persons but also for elderly. However, such a rapid grow of aging 
populations suggest that requirements for electric mobile systems will soon increase 
dramatically for supporting mobility and activity of elderly people and reducing labor of 
care-givers. 

However, those mobile systems do not have enough functionalities and capabilities for 
moving around existing environments including step, rough terrain, slopes, gaps, floor 
irregularities as well as insufficient traction powers and maneuverability in crowded areas. 
Promotion of barrier-free environments will be required for a large number of users of 
wheelchairs and other electric mobile systems however, re-constructing of the existing 
facilities could not be a feasible solution because of the limitations in economy and time. 
For overcoming the problem, to improve the mobility of the electric mobile systems to adapt 
to existing environments could be one solution. For this objective, we propose a new type of 
wheelchair, four-wheel-drive (4WD) omnidirectional system, with enhanced step climb 
capability together with high maneuverability. In this chapter, omnidirectional control of a 
wheelchair with 4 WD mechanism would be mainly discussed. 

The mobile systems realizing holonomic and omnidirectional motion is one of the important 
research area in mobile robots. It provide flexibility and high maneuverability to motion 
planners and human drivers. The holonomic and omnidirectional mobile capability is very 
convenient for human drivers since they do not have to understand drive mechanisms and 
its configuration at all. A human only commands the direction and velocity of motion 
he/ her wants to perform since a holonomic and omnidirectional mechanism can start to 
move in any direction with any configuration of the mechanism such as directions of wheels. 

58 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

This characteristics is vary suitable for wheelchairs and personal mobiles which is used for 
daily life for maneuvering crowded area at home. 

In the following sections, a new type of omnidirectional system is proposed which realizes 
the holonomic and omnidirectional capability together with high mobility on irregular 
terrains or steps. 

2. Conventional Omnidirectional Systems For Wheelchairs 

A standard wheelchair cannot move sideways. It needs a complex series of movements 
resembling parallel automobile parking when a wheelchair user wants to move sideways. A 
lot of omnidirectional drive systems were developed and applied to electric wheelchairs to 
enhance standard wheelchair maneuverability by enabling them to move sideways without 
changing the chair orientation. In Fig. 1, an omnidirectional wheelchair with Mechanum 
wheels [2] uses barrel-shaped rollers on the large wheel's rim inclining the direction of 
passive rolling 45 degrees from the main wheel shaft and enabling the wheel to slide in the 
direction of rolling. The standard four-Mechanum-wheel configuration assumes a car-like 
layout. The inclination of rollers on the Mechanum wheel causes the contact point to vary 
relative to the main wheel, resulting in energy loss due to conflictions in motion among the 
four wheels. Because four-point contact is essential, a suspension mechanism is definitely 
needed to ensure 3-degrees-of-freedom (3DOF) movement. Fig.2 shows an omnidirectinal 
wheelchair with ball wheel mechanisms developed at MIT [3]. Each ball wheel is driven by 
an individual motor which provides active traction force in a specific direction while 
perpendicular to the active direction. With this drive system, the point of contact of a wheel 
is stable relative to the wheelchair body that enables accurate motion control and smooth 
movements with no vibration. 

Fig. 1. Omnidirectional wheelchair with Mechanum wheels [2] 

Fig. 2. Ball wheel omnidirectional wheelchair [3] 

Motion Control of a Four-wheel-drive 

Omnidirectional Wheelchair with High Step Climbing Capability 59 

The other omnidirectional mechanism is VUTON crawler [4] which consists of many 
cylindrical free rollers. Since VUTON mechanism allows the multiple rollers to touch the 
ground simultaneously, heavy load can be applied on the platform. 

All of the above omnidirectional systems need one motor to drive one wheel mechanism 
therefore four motors are needed to drive a four-wheeled wheelchair, while a wheelchair 
has three degrees of freedoms (DOF) on the floor. Thus, it involves 1 DOF redundancy in 
actuation which causes conflictions in motion among the four wheels. 

3. Four-Wheel-Drive (4WD) Mechanism 

To give a high mobile capability to a wheelchair, we introduce a four-wheel-drive (4WD) 
mechanism to our omnidirectional mobile system. At first, the original 4WD design is 
simply mentioned. 

The 4 WD drive system was invented in 1989 [5] for enhancing the traction and step climbing 
capability of the differential drive systems which schematic is illustrated in Fig.3. This 4WD 
mechanism has recently applied to a product design by a Japanese company [6]. The 
wheelchair equips four wheels, two omni-wheels in front and two normal tires in rear. A 
normal wheel and an omni-wheel, mounted on the same side of the chair, are 
interconnected by a chain or a belt transmission to rotate in unison with a drive motor. A 
common motor is installed to drive normal and omni wheel pair via synchro-drive 
transmission on each side of the mechanism. Then two motors provide deferent velocity on 
each side witch presents differential drive motion of 4WD mechanism. Thus all four wheels 
on 4 WD can provide traction forces. Since the center of rotation shifts backward, when it 
turns about a steady point on the floor, it requires large space when the wheelchair is 
controlled in the standard differential drive manner. The offset distance between drive 
wheels and a center of a chair makes the maneuverability of the wheelchair worse. 

U 

Fig. 3. Original 4 WD synchronized transmission 

4. Powered-caster Omnidirectional Control 

We apply powered-caster control to 4WD mechanism to give an omnidirectional mobile 
capability to a wheelchair with 4 WD. In this section, The powered-caster omnidirectional 
control for the original single type configuration [7] is breafly mentioned followed by the 
control of 4WD mechanism in the next section. 

60 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

4.1 Powered-caster Mechanism 

Fig.4 shows a top view of a powered-caster. The original design of the powered-caster is a 
single wheel type in which normal wheel is off-centered from steering shaft. The wheel shaft 
and the steering shaft of the powered-caster is driven by independent motors. When only 
the wheel shaft is rotated by the motor, the caster moves in forward direction which is 
denoted as x w in Fig.4. When only the steering shaft is rotated by an another motor, the 
mechanism rotates about the point of contact which is also shown in the figure. By this 
motion of rotation, the steering shaft moves in lateral in y w at the instant which is tangential 

of the circle which center is at the point of contact with the radius is s, the caster-offset. 
These velocity vectors are independently controlled and directing right angle for each other. 
To generate a velocity V in the direction 6 at the center of the steering shaft, the wheel and 
the steering shaft rotations, o)w and cos, are derived by the following kinematics. 

co w 

CO 

cos# 

sin# 

1 

sin# 

-cos# 

a) 

where s and r are the caster offset and the wheel radius respectively. Thus shaft rotations are 
determined by a function of 6, the relative angle between the desired direction and the 
wheel mechanism. 

Point of contact Center of steering shaft 

Fig. 4. Velocity control of a powered-caster 

4.2 Omnidirectional Mobile Robot with Powered-casters 

Figure 5 shows a schematic overview of an omnidirectional mobile robot with two powered- 
casters. The robot with a pair of powered-casters is controlled by four electric motors which 
involves one redundant DOF in actuation. For this class of omnidirectional robots, the 
powered-caster provides an active traction force in an arbitrary direction for propelling the 
robot. To coordinate the multiple powered-casters, motors on a powered-caster are 
controlled based on the velocity based robot model. 

Motion Control of a Four-wheel-drive 

Omnidirectional Wheelchair with High Step Climbing Capability 

61 

The inverse kinematics of two-wheeled mobile robot is represented as (2) which represents a 
relationship between the commanded robot velocity in 3DOF[ x v , y v , (j) y ] and a A wheel 
velocity [x a ,y a ] and a B wheel velocity [ x h ,y h \. 

x a 

1 

-^cos^ v 

y a 

1 

-fsin^ 

K 

i 

^cos^ v 

y b 

1 

-^sin^ v 

(2) 

Fig. 5. A two-wheeled omnidirectional robot 

5. Omnidirectional Control of 4WD Mobile system 

In our project, it is a goal to develop an omnidirectional wheelchair with high mobility and 
maneuverability in a single design which can be used in multiple environments including 
outdoor and indoor. To enable a wheelchair to move in any direction instantaneously, 
omnidirectional control method, called "powered-caster control" which was introduced in 
previous section, is extended and applied to the 4WD mechanism [7]. Fig.6 shows a 
schematic of the 4WD omnidirectional wheelchair. The wheelchair has two omniwheels in 
front and standard pneumatic tires in rear which form 4WD configuration. A pair of an 
omniwheel and a pneumatic tire mounted on the same side of the wheelchair are connected 
by belt transmission for rotating unison and driven by a common motor which 
configuration is completely identical to the original 4 WD system shown in Fig.3. 
In our design, an additional third motor is mounted on the conventional 4WD platform for 
rotating a chair about the vertical axis which is also illustrated in Fig.6. Those three motors 
including two wheel motors and the chair rotation motor enable the wheelchair to realize 
independent 3DOF omnidirectional motion by a coordinated motion control [8], [9]. 

62 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

To achieve coordinated control for omnidirectional motion of a chair, the powered-caster 
omnidirectional control for a twin-caster configuration has been applied to the 4WD system. 
Fig. 7 illustrates a schematic top view of a 4 WD mechanism. In Fig. 7, it is found that rear two 
drive wheels and center axis form a twin-caster configuration, i.e. parallel two wheels are 
located on the off-centered position which midpoint is distant from vertical steering axis, 
which is emphasized by thick lines in the Fig. 7 and a vehicle with a twin caster drive 
mechanism is shown in Fig. 8. The powered-caster omnidirectional control enables the caster 
mechanism to emulate the caster motion by actuating wheel and steering axes. 

Motor for 

chair rotation 

Fig. 6. A 4WD omnidirectional wheelchair 

Fig. 7. Omnidirectional vehicle with 4WD mechanism 

Fig. 8. Omnidirectional vehicle with a twin-caster 

Motion Control of a Four-wheel-drive 

Omnidirectional Wheelchair with High Step Climbing Capability 

63 

The powered-caster-based coordinate control of three motors needs a kinematic model of 
the 4 WD [10]. The kinematic model represents the relationships between the motion of the 
4 WD and the three motor angular velocities of the drive wheels and the chair rotation axis. 
First, we consider the fundamental motions of a twin-caster drive (TCD). Figure 9a shows 
the translational motion of the vehicle in which two wheels rotate in same angular velocity 
to travel in same direction. In this case, TCD travels also straight forward, therefore TCD 
velocity and its rotation are represented as follows. 

K=-( V r+ V l) = V 

(3) 

Figure 9b shows another motion in which two wheels are rotated at same angular velocities 
but in opposite directions resulting in spin of TCD about the midpoint of two wheels. This 
motion provides only rotation but no translation velocity which is represented as, 

^v=-k+vj=0 

W 

( v r- v l) z 

2v 
W 

(4) 

(a): Motion in X-direction (b): Motion in Y-direction 
Fig. 9. Omnidirectional control for twin-caster drive (TCD) 

Now we focus on the motion of the steering center whose location is identical to the rotation 
center of a chair. When TCD rotates about the midpoint of two wheels, the center of the 
steering presents a circular motion whose center is at the midpoint and the radius equals the 
caster offset, s. At each moment, velocity at the center is directing tangential direction of the 
circle which directs the lateral direction of TCD at all times. The lateral velocity denoted by 
y v in Fig. 9b is represented by, 

: S / x 2SV 
V = S0 v = (V„ ~V T )= 

(5) 

64 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

The translation velocities x v and y v are directed at right angles to each other. Note here, the 
rotation of TCD is not independently controlled since the rotation (j) v is determined by 
creating the lateral velocity y v to satisfy Eq (5). From Eqs. (3)-(5), the relationships between 
the vehicle translation velocity and wheel velocities are derived as, 

1/2 1/2 
slW -slW 

(6) 

Thus, translation velocities along the X- and Y-directions are completely determined and 
independently controlled by wheel velocities. To generate the required velocity vector that 
directs in an arbitrary direction with arbitrary magnitude, the reference vector is projected 
in X- and Y-directions of vehicle coordinate system (Fig. 10). The velocity component in each 
direction, x v or y v , can be independently achieved by using kinematics of TCD in Eq. (6). 

Fig. 10. Projection of a command velocity into vehicle coordinate system depending on the 
TCD orientation. 

When the reference velocity is steady to the ground, the velocity components in X- and Y- 
directions vary depending on the TCD orientation relative to the ground. Therefore, wheel 
velocities also vary which results in straight motion of the TCD center (see Fig. 11). TCD 
shows spontaneous flipping behavior during the motion, which is often found in passive 
casters installed on legs of chairs and tables, etc. It is said the powered-caster control 
emulates caster motion by actively actuating the wheel axis. 

Fig. 11 shows a one of the simulation results in which an omnidirectional control of the twin- 
caster mechanism are tested. In the simulation, twin-caster mechanism is controlled to track 
a straight line with a center of a mechanism locating on the line at all times. During the 
motion, the orientation of the mechanism is rapidly flipped over and orient to the direction 
of motion. This flip motion is often seen on passive casters which installed on the legs of 
office chairs and tables. Thus the powered-caster control achieves the emulation of caster 
motions by coordinated control of multiple actuators. 

Motion Control of a Four-wheel-drive 

Omnidirectional Wheelchair with High Step Climbing Capability 

65 

Fig. 11. Omnidirectional control for twin-caster mechanism 

Translation in arbitrary direction is achieved by TCD as presented above. However, 
orientation of TCD can not be controlled independently by the wheel rotations. To control 
3DOF motion of a chair, the chair rotation axis must be also coordinated. The velocity 
command is given based on the chair orientation since a joystick is fixed on the chair. Then 
the command velocity is translated into TCD coordinate by the relative orientation of the 
chair to the vehicle, 6y. as 

x c = x v cos 9 V - y v sin 9 V 
y c =x v sm6 v +y v cos6 v 

(7) 

From eqs. (6) and (7), an overall kinematic model of the omnidirectional 4 WD wheelchair is 
represented as follows. 

where, 

V 

(Jn 

Jn 

°1 

M 

y c 

= 

Jn 

22 

w L 

A j 

[rlW 

-rlW 

U 

\a> s ) 

(8) 

/„ = 

r cos 9 rs sin 9 

W 

r cos 9 rs sin 9 

J l2 = - + - 

2 W 

r sin 9 rs cos 9 
J»= ^ + - 

(9) 

j ~~ 

2 W 

r sin 9 rs cos 9 

W 

Where r,W and s are the wheel radius, tread and caster-offset, respectively. A 3x3 matrix in 
the right side of eq.(8), called as Jacobian, is a function of orientation of the 4WD unit with 
relative to the chair base, 6^. All elements in the Jacobian can always be calculated and a 
determinant of the Jacobian may not be zero for any (K. Therefore there is no singular point 
on the mechanism and an inverse Jacobian always exits. The three motors are controlled to 

realize a 3DOF angular velocity commands x v , y v and (j) v by independent speed controllers 

66 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

for omnidirectional movements. Thus, holonomic 3DOF motion can be realized by the 
proposed mechanism. This class of omnidirectional mobility, so called "holonomic 
mobility", is very effective to realize the high maneuverability of wheelchairs by an easy and 
simple operation. 

6. Prototype Design 

6.1 Mechanical Design 

Wheelchair specifications for prototype design are shown in Table 1. The wheelbase and 
tread of the 4WD mechanism are 400mm and 535mm respectively. Those dimensions are 
determined to satisfy the limitation of the standard wheelchair specification for the 
dimension, 600mm in width and 700mm in length as shown in the spec. The required step 
height which can be surmounted by the wheelchair is approx. 100mm for accessing to a 
train car from a station platform with no assistance. The maximum running speed for 
continuous drive is 6km/ h which is same as conventional standard wheelchairs in Japan. 
Fig.12 illustrates a 3D drawing of a prototype designed by 3D CAD. Fig.13 shows an 
overview of the prototype wheelchair. 

Dimension 

Width 

600mm 

Length 

700mm 

Height 

450mm 

Weight 

Total 

1 80kg (human+ wheelchair ) 

Wheelchair 

100kg (including batteries) 

Speed 

6km/h (Max.) 

Surmountable step 

100mm in height 

Table 1. Wheelchair Specifications 

Fig. 12. Prototype bottom view by 3D CAD 

Motion Control of a Four-wheel-drive 

Omnidirectional Wheelchair with High Step Climbing Capability 

67 

Fig. 13. 4 WD omnidirectional wheelchair prototype 

6.2 Control system 

Figure 14 shows a control system of the wheelchair prototype. Most of equipments 
including a controller, motors, motor drivers, a battery and sensors are installed on 4WD 
mechanism side. Electric power is provided by a car battery and distributed to all 
components on the chair after the inversion to AC 100V. A tablet PC controls three motors to 
realize an omnidirectional and holonomic motions of a wheelchair based on reference 
velocity commanded by a 3D joystick. A velocity command is sent to each motor driver via 
a D/A interface while a encoder pulse is sent back to the PC via a pulse counter interface 
which form a velocity feedback loop of the axis. An absolute encoder is installed only on the 
chair rotation shaft which detects relative angle between the 4WD and the chair which needs 
no initialization process at power on reset. Since a chair have to rotate continuously with no 
mechanical limit, slip rings are also installed on the chair rotation axis. A USB hub on the 
chair side enables extension of devices additional to an A/D converter for the 3D joystick. 

& 

< 

t3D Joystick ■ ' — [TWer 

Adapter ri^—. 

4WDside 1 

DC/AC 
Inverter 

ffl 

Battery 

t 

> 

Slip Rings 

Chair Rotation Axis 

Abs. 
Encoder 

Adapter 

PCMCIA Ext. Slots 

I | 1 Power 11 

J U Reduction I 

1 FT 

L| r 1 Motor 

V / Driver 

^^^ AC 

LflftWhwl Motor 

Pulse 
Out 

Pulse 
Counter 

una 

A,B 

-A 

y 

IT 

Reduc. 
gear 

AC 

Motor 

Pulse 
Out 

Fig. 14. System configuration of the prototype wheelchair 

Power Motor 

I Driver 

Vel. RefJ I Pulse 

O ut_ 

= ; -" B H 

Power I 1 ■ 

i Reductionh-B V\ 

gear !"■ I 

Motor L| i-l 

Dnver AC ^ J 

MotOT Right Wheel 

68 Climbing and Walking Robots 

7. Experiments 

7.1 Omnidirectional motion 

To verify the omnidirectional mobility of the proposed system, lateral motion was presented 
by the prototype wheelchair while keeping the chair orientation constant. 
A small ball was attached to the chair to measure the location of the center of the steering 
axis. A stereo camera system (Quick Mag IV from OKK Inc, Japan) detects the ball location 
in 3D coordinates. The prototype was controlled by a remote PC via a LAN connection 
through which the remote PC send the velocity command to the wheelchair controller. Thus, 
a complete linear trajectory in lateral direction was commanded to the prototype. Figure 15 
shows a chair motion detected by the stereo camera system. An actual and a reference path 
are plotted in the figure which closely agree. Figure 16 shows tracking errors between the 
actual and the reference. The error was suppressed to within 10mm (+5 to -5mm) despite the 
flipping behavior of the 4WD occurred during the experiment motion. 

The camera system also provided real-time video images with over-writing rectangle 
window(s) and the path of the target(s) (in this experiment, a small ball). Figure 17(a)-(f) 
shows a series of video images. The prototype wheelchair moved from the right side of the 
picture frame to the left. The final picture, Fig. 17(f) shows a straight path which was created 
by the wheelchair movement. During the motion, the flipping behavior of the 4WD is found 
in Fig. 17(b), (c) and (d), which is also shown in a computer simulation in Fig. 11. 

7.2 Variable center of rotation 

The proposed system realizes holonomic and omnidirectional motion of a chair by the 
coordinated control of three motors. The holonomic mobile capability makes it possible to 
change the location of a center of rotation at any point to fit to customer requests. In a 
normal setup, a chair rotates about its center when the operator commands a spin turn by 
twisting the joystick. However, the location of the center is variable in the control program 
to any point including the out-of-footprint area of the wheelchair. However, usual requests 
may be to shift it to the back side to simulate a rear drive wheelchair, or to the front side to 
simulate a front drive wheelchair. To present the flexibility of the proposed system, two 
patterns of spin turn motion were performed. Figure 18(a) and (b) shows the final image of 
each test run provided by the stereo camera system. In Fig. 18(a), the wheelchair rotated 
about the front position which was located approx. 500 mm forward of the center of the 
chair. In Fig. 18(b), the center was shifted also approx. 500 mm towards the rear. From these 
results, the center of rotation can be customized to an individual. 

khair Tra.pctory (Lateralm otim) 

1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 

Fig. 15. Reference and actual trajectories of the 4WD wheelchair 

Motion Control of a Four-wheel-drive 

Omnidirectional Wheelchair with High Step Climbing Capability 

69 

10.0 

7.5 

5.0 

2.5 

0.0 

-2.5 

-5.0 

-7.5 

-10.0 

Trackhg Error (Lateralm otbn) 

400 600 

Path length mm 

Fig. 16. Tracking error on the experiment using 4 WD wheelchair 

t~~~^M~^i'~~ 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

Fig. 17. An example of omnidirectional motion 1: the lateral motion of the wheelchair 
prototype; it moves in sideways from the right side to the left of the picture frames while 
maintaining the chair orientation to be stable. 

(a) Spin turn about the front position 
Fig. 18 Variable center of rotation 

(b) Spin turn about the back position 

70 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

7.3 Task example 

The holonomic and omnidirectional mobile systems are easy to maneuver because 3D 
command in X- and Y- directions and rotation are directory commanded and an operator 
does not have to consider the wheel motions and its configurations. 

To demonstrate maneuverability, a task example was performed by the prototype. The task 
of getting out of a room by pulling the door open is one of difficult tasks for a wheelchair 
user. A task of pulling the door is relatively more difficult than pushing the door. This task 
example includes sub tasks such as: 1) approaching to the door to grasp the door knob, 2) 
moving backward to pull the door open, 3) going through the door and getting out of the 
room, and 4) driving to another location. 

Figure 19(a)-(j) show screen shots of the experiment. In this test, the prototype wheelchair 
was operated using a 3D joystick by a human operator who was sitting on the chair. Since 
the wheelchair has high maneuverability, the task was successfully achieved with no 
collision with the door or a wall. The operator did not see the 4WD mechanism during the 
task, however, the 4WD mechanism changed its orientation widely when the operator 
moved sideways to avoid colliding with the door (Fig. 19(d)-(g)). 

Figure 20 shows the 3D commands (X, Y and Rotation) to the wheelchair during the task of 
Fig. 19 which shows 3D simultaneous motion to complete the door opening task. Those are 
found in sub tasks including, 1) approaching the door and 4-1) turning after exiting the 
room. Individual lateral translations are often found in subtask 3) exiting the room. 

Fig. 19. An example of tasks using a electric wheelchair: Getting out of a room with pulling a 
door open. 

Motion Control of a Four-wheel-drive 

Omnidirectional Wheelchair with High Step Climbing Capability 

71 

Wheelchair task of getting out of a room with pulling a door open 

Fig. 20. 3DMotion of wheelchair presenting a door opening task for exiting a room 

8. Conclusion 

Mechanism and omnidirectional control of a 4WD mechanism for wheelchairs are presented 
in this chapter. The omnidirectional wheelchair system is proposed for improving 
maneuverability of standard wheelchairs The 4WD mechanism has high mobility which 
equips four wheels, two omni-wheels in the front and two normal tires in the rear, and all 
wheels provide traction even with two motors to drive these wheels. To realize holonomic 
and omnidirectional motion of a chair by utilizing the 4WD mechanism, the proposed 
system includes the third motor to rotate the chair at the center of the 4WD mechanism 
about the vertical axis. 

For omnidirectional control of the 4WD mechanism, powered-caster control has been 
applied. To achieve a coordinated control of three motors, kinematics of the 4 WD 
wheelchair was analyzed and a kinematic model was derived which represents the 
relationships between 3DOF wheelchair motion and the rotations of three motors. In the 
powered-caster control, two wheel motors are coordinated to translate the center of the chair 
in an arbitrary direction while the chair orientation is controlled by the third motor 
separately. 

The omnidirectional motion was verified by a series of experiments using a wheelchair 
prototype. First, omnidirectional mobility was tested in which the wheelchair made a lateral 
motion without changing its orientation. Next, one of a applications of the holonomic 
mobility was performed in which the center of rotation was varied by a control program to 
customize per user request for simulating the wheelchair drive types, such as front drive, 
rear drive, or center drive. 

To present the high maneuverability of the proposed omnidirectional mobile system, a task 
example was performed in which an operator maneuvered the wheelchair by 3D joystick to 
exit a room with pulling the door open. The task was successfully achieved with no collision 

72 Climbing and Walking Robots 

with the door or walls. During the task, it was found that the simultaneous 3DOF motions, 

lateral translation are often commanded as well as the forward translation for pursuing the 

task. 

From these experiments, the omnidirectional and holonomic mobile capability are shown to 

be very effective and useful for maneuvering in crowded areas and achieving complicated 

tasks. 

9. Acknowledgment 

This project was supported by the Industrial Technology Research Grant Program in 2006 
from the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO), 
Japan, research ID 05A06715a. 

10. References 

[1] Population Statistics Japan 2006, by the National Institute of Population and Social 

Security Research, Japan. 
[2] All-direction Power-driven Chair "FJ-UEC-600", Fujian Fortune Jet Mechanical & 

Electrical Technology Co., Ltd. 
[3] M. Wada and H. H. Asada (1999) Design and Control of a Variable Footprint Mechanism 

for Holonomic and Omnidirectional Vehicles and its Application to Wheelchairs, 

IEEE Trans on Robotics and Automation, Vol.15, No. 6, pp. 978-989. 
[4] S. Hirose and S. Amano (1993) The VUTON : High Payload High Efficiency Holonomic 

Omni-Directional Vehicle, 6th Int. Symp. on Robotics Research. 
[5] Jefferey Farnam (1989), Four-wheel Drive Wheel-chair with Compound Wheels, US 

patent 4,823,900. 
[6] Kanto Automobile Corp. "Patrafour" 

http://www.kanto-aw.co.jp/jp/products/wheelchair/ 
[7] M. Wada and S. Mori (1996), Holonomic and Omnidirectional Vehicle with Conventional 

Tires, Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 

Automation (ICRA96), pp. 3671-3676. 
[8] M. Wada, A. Takagi and S. Mori (2000), Caster Drive Mechanisms for Holonomic and 

Omnidirectional Mobile Platforms with no Over Constraint, Proceedings of the 

2000 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA2000), pp. 

1531-1538. 
[9] M. Wada (2007), Omnidirectional and Holonomic Mobile Platform with Four-Wheel- 
Drive Mechanism for Wheelchairs, JSME Journal of Robotics and Mechatronics, 

Vol. 19, No. 3, pp. 264-271. 
[10] M. Wada (2007), Holonomic and Omnidirectional Wheelchairs with synchronized 4WD 

Mechanism, Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on 

Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS2007), pp. 1196-1202. 

Stair Climbing Robots and High-grip Crawler 

1 )Kan Yoneda, Wusuke Ota and 2 )Shigeo Hirose 
VChiba Institute of Technology, 2 >Tokyo Institute of Technology 

Japan 

1. Introduction 

Stair climbing is one of the most attractive performance of mobile robot for both legged and 
wheeled, (e.g. Stoeter et al, 2002; Murphy, 2000; Yim et al, 2000; Krishna et al., 1997; 
Granosik et al, 2005; Liu et al, 2005; Arai et al, 2006; Tanaka et al, 2006; Miyanaka et al, 
2007; Tsukagoshi et al.,2005) 

Authors have been developing various kinds of stair climbers, considering how to make its 
climbing ability higher and its mechanical complexity reasonable and practical. The research 
includes realizing a large step negotiating height, controlling to keep its centre of gravity 
almost the centre of ground contacting area, higher speed of climbing up, large load 
tolerance to carry on. Reducing body weight and energy consumption is also the important 
matter of developing. 

In the first part of this chapter, we introduce some solutions to realize stair climbing 
machines that we developed. Each of them has good performance as in a category of their 
kind, e.g. various numbers of legged and wheeled shapes. Then, we discuss a development 
of high-grip crawler, which we think one of the best solutions as the stair climber. 

2. Various Stair Climbers 

2.1 Biped 

We have been developing biped configuration robot named "YANBO" since 1985. 
YANBO-1, as shown in Figure 1, was the first developed model (Yoneda, 1987). YANBO-1 
consists of five Degrees of Freedom (DOF) which can be considered almost minimum DOF 
necessity for walking on the level ground. YANBO-1 is confirmed that by walking on 
horizontal level ground and climb stairs. 

YANBO-2 (Ota et al, 2001a; Ota et al, 2002), as shown in Figure 2, and YANBO-3 (Ota et al, 
2003), as shown in Figure 3, were second model which could be performed not only 
mobility but also manipulability to attach two more DOF. Additional DOF is allocated to 
each ankle joint and can help to generate three ankle joint motions freely. This helps to walk 
on incline slopes and appropriate manipulate motions. Then total DOF increases to eight, 
however, the number of actuators are still much less than other biped structure robot, like 
humanoid (Yoneda & Ota, 2003). 

74 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 1. YANBO-1, Stair climbing motion 

Fig. 2. YANBO-2, Step climbing motion. 

2.2 Quadruped 

Authors also have been developing various kinds of quadruped walking robot (Hirose et al. 
2009). TIT AN- VI, as shown in Figure 5, has succeeded to walk on stairs (Hirose et al. 1995; 
Yoneda et al., 2000). TIT AN- VI consists of two separated body segments, where front and 
rear segment can slide linearly up and down in order to negotiate a large height difference 
of front and rear landing points on the stairs. 

Stair Climbing Robots and High-grip Crawler 

75 

Fig. 3. YANBO-3, which also equipped with manipulability 

-" '- " - _^^fl 

m m m 

* 

J 

m 

Fig. 4. Slope climbing (left) and Stair climbing (right) of YANBO-3 

Authors have also been developed quadruped with another strategy, according to the 
design concept in which total number of actuators can be used as small as possible. 
Hyperion, as shown in Figure 6, was quadruped walking robot with minimum actuated- 
DOF for walking motion. (Yoneda et al, 2001a; Yoneda & Ota, 2003; Yoneda, 2007) Taking 
lightweight advantages with small number of actuators that is three motors are used in 
Hypeion-1 and 5 motors are used in Hyperion-2, a wall climbing robot "Hyperion-ISP" and 
"Hyperion-2SP" was developed. Wall climbing motion and ceiling walking motion of 

76 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Hyperion-ISP are shown in Figure 7 and Figure 8, respectively (Yoneda et aL, 2001b; Ota et 
aL, 2006). In Hyperion 2SP, transfer motion from ground to wall can be succeeded. 

^Mf^SplWi 

III 

ml 

1 1 

T jF 1 r 

ilL 

i J- A t jl 

Fig. 5. TIT AN- VI, Stair climbing motion, and two body segments can slide (right) 

Fig. 6. Hyperion-1, and its DOF configuration 

Fig. 7. Hyperion-ISP, light weight wall climbing robot 

Stair Climbing Robots and High-grip Crawler 

77 

. Vy- ; 

Fig. 8. Hyperion-ISP can succeed to walk on ceiling using blower and suction feet 

2.3 Six-legged 

We have been also developing six-legged walking robot. ParaWalker-II (Ota et al., 
2001a;Yoneda & Ota, 2003), as shown in Figure 9, composed two frames with three legs each, 
and each frames are connected by three arms with two actuated joints. Total numbers of 
actuators are six to generate each frame 6-DOF motion that is necessary and sufficient DOF 
to lead walking and tasking motion. Moreover, in order to acquire higher step adaptabilities 
to move stairs, one more actuator was attached for extending a leg and keeping frame 
balance during stair climbing. 

Fig. 9. ParaWalker-II, walking and task performing twin-frame mobile system, and its stair 
climbing motion to extend one leg 

2.4 Leg-wheel Hybrid 

Generally, legged-locomotion has very high adaptabilities. However, mobility of wheeled 
locomotion is much more interesting than legged-locomotion if the moving place is limited 
to a flat plane. Therefore, much higher mobility can be obtained if both methods are 
adopted; wheeled locomotion on flat planes and legged-locomotion on uneven terrain. We 
have developed several leg- wheel hybrid robots. 

Hyperion-W has developed one of leg-wheel hybrid robot (Takahashi et al., 2006), whose 
base body is used the Hyperion-1, which is a quadruped robot with minimum three 
actuators mentioned above, and actuated wheels are attached to each legs. Hyperion-W can 
perform a hybrid motion of walking and running on uneven terrain as shown in Figure 10 
and show its high mobility. 

78 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

And we have another maneuver to realize the leg-wheel hybrid locomotion. YANBO-2 and 
YANBO-3, mentioned above, have 3-DOF ankle joint with eternity rota table circle shaped 
sole. Therefore using these characteristics, both YANBO-2 and YANBO-3 can establish leg 
and wheel hybrid locomotion manoeuvres (Ota et al., 2002; Ota et al., 2003), as shown in 
Figure 11. 

Fig. 10. Hyper ion- W, a leg- wheel Hybrid robot 

Fig. 11. Two different style of Leg- Wheel Hybrid locomotion in YANBO-3, wheeled 
locomotion (upper) and wheeled and leg mixture locomotion (lower) 

Stair Climbing Robots and High-grip Crawler 79 

3. Advantages of Crawler type Vehicles in practical use 

Through from above mentioned various types of researches, we believe one of the realistic 
solution which the robots should support and help human tasks in our daily lives is to carry 
heavy baggage especially by wheeled or crawler type climbers. Because wheeled or crawler 
type vehicles have much more payload capacity than legged-walking robots have. Therefore, 
when carrying heavy objects, a cart is useful only on flat ground, and the load must be 
carried up or down stairs by hand. Conventional approaches to transporting heavy loads on 
the stairs have yet to be developed. Moreover, humans themselves sometimes require 
assistance in traversing stairs. Mobile robots require the ability to move with versatility, 
smoothly and with high efficiency in various environments. Robots with high mobility can 
easily be used in rescue operations as the robot can move over irregular terrain of collapsed 
and destroyed buildings. 

In our living environment, the most difficult artificial obstacles to move over are stairs. 
There have been many studies to improve the ability to traverse stairs using legged-type, 
crawler-type and wheeled-type robots that have special shapes. Among these mobile robots, 
crawler-type and wheeled-type robots are easier to control and so there are many examples, 
including crawlers with attached grousers (Hirose et al. 1989; Hirose et al., 1990; Hirose et al., 
1992), crawlers for rescue operations (Takayama et al., 2000; Granosik et al., 2005; Liu et al., 
2005; Arai et al., 2006; Tanaka et al., 2006; Miyanaka et al., 2007), wheels with coil springs 
(Hirose et al, 1991), special tires (Uchida et al, 1999; Uchida et al, 2000), and legs that rotate 
along wheels (Taguchi et al., 1995; Schempf et al., 1999). 

In the present research, our goal is to design a practical vehicle to obtain high terrain 
adaptability and mobility in the human living environment, especially to traverse stairs or 
steps. To acquire reliable mobility, we developed a new crawler that can obtain a high grip 
force not by grousers hooking the stairs, but by the deformation of the face material that 
touches the edges of the stairs. Experimental results revealed that the characteristics of the 
material that composes the face of the crawler belt affect the grip force. In the present 
research, a tracked climber vehicle with powder-filled belts carrying heavy loads is 
proposed and developed, and the efficiency and practical applicability of the proposed 
tracked climber vehicle are verified. 

4. Comparison of a Crawler with Rigid Grousers and with Soft Deformation 
Belts 

A previous crawler was equipped with grousers in order to obtain a certain grip force on 
stairs. Grousers work very well when the crawler moves over sand or mud, and such 
crawlers can support heavy loads. However, in the case of traversing stairs or steps, such 
crawlers have a number of disadvantages, as described below. 

1. The intervals of the grousers and the steps do not generally coincide. Thus, the 
crawler is held by only one grouser on one crawler belt, as shown in Figure 12. 
Carrying heavy loads with this gripping grouser causes the vehicle to vibrate and 
may destroy the stair edge. Gripping force is lost easily after the stair edge is 
destroyed or one of the grousers becomes caught on an obstacle on the stairs. 
These phenomena reduce the vehicle's stability and safety, and thus these should 
be avoided. 

80 Climbing and Walking Robots 

2. Slippage may occur when the crawler descends the stairs. When ascending the 
stairs, the crawler belt simply spins until the grouser touches the step. However, 
when descending the stairs, the crawler moves forward, down the stairs, even 
when the grousers do not catch a step. 

3. A grouser that has caught a step moves backward as the crawler moves forward 
up the stairs, as shown in Figure 13. The grouser leaves the step when the grouser 
comes to the end of crawler. In this situation, other grousers may not necessarily 
be touching the next step. Therefore, the crawler may slip down or spin off the 
belt until another grouser catches the next step. 

4. If it does not climb the stairs in a straight path, the crawler may not obtain 
sufficient grip force because the grousers, which have a wide structure for easy 
attachment to the crawler belt, would touch the stair edges at an angle. This 
would hamper the mobility of the crawler when adjusting the trajectory to the 
right or to the left when climbing stairs. 

These disadvantages can be partially solved by arranging the grousers in shorter intervals. 
However, as shown in Figure 14, grousers arranged in short intervals do not have large 
support areas. Furthermore, if the intervals between the grousers become shorter, the ability 
to climb stairs in non-straight trajectories becomes worse, thus increasing the consequences 
of the fourth disadvantage. 

As shown in Figure 15, deforming the crawler belt adaptively to the stairs to obtain a grip 
force from all of the steps appears to be an effective method by which to address these 
disadvantages. Supporting the crawler at several points prevents slippage accidents caused 
by the lack of stair edges or by an obstacle becoming caught between the stairs and the 
crawler belt. In addition, by changing the support points when the vehicle is moving also 
avoids a freely spinning belt. The required grip force at each grip point is far smaller than in 
the case of only one grip point. 

To obtain a grip force from each step as described above, a rubber material with a large 
friction coefficient can be easily attached to the face of the crawler belt. However, this 
method is not necessarily practical for versatile application. For example, outdoor stairs 
with rounded edges, stairs with metallic edges that have a low coefficient of friction, oily 
stairs in factories or stairs covered by fallen leaves or dust may cause slippage. In such 
environments, a greater grip force may be obtained by making a ditch on the belt at the 
edges of the steps so that the crawler belt will match the stair edge shape and the 
effectiveness of the crawler will not depend on the friction at the face of the belt. Aligning 
materials with soft deformation characteristics to the face of the crawler belt is considered to 
be an effective and practical method by which to achieve these characteristics. 

Stair Climbing Robots and High-grip Crawler 

81 

Fig. 12. Grouser-attached stair-climbing crawler 

Fig. 13. Slippage problem of the grouser-attached stair-climbing crawler 

Fig. 14. Problem of short distance between grousers 

82 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 15. New concept of stair-climbing crawler 

5. Blocks Filled with Powder and Comparison of the Characteristics of 
Materials 

5.1 Blocks Filled with Powder 

Usually, rubber or a urethane sponge (which have soft deformation characteristics) are used 
as the track material, as mentioned earlier. However, as shown in Figure 16, we have 
developed special blocks that attach to the crawler belt and rely on the deformation 
characteristics of fluids. Tubes with durability and flexibility are filled with powder and the 
edges of the tubes are bent for the purpose of attachment to the crawler belt. In the present 
study, flour is used as the powder. Sand was also found to be an effective powder. A fire 
hose is used as the tube material. The hose is turned inside out so that the cloth side faces 
inward and the resinous side faces outward. There is room for improvement in the 
durability and water-resistance of these materials. 

Next, a comparison of the characteristics between the developed blocks filled with powder 
and the previous soft materials will be performed. Furthermore, the suitability of materials 
for the crawler belt for a stair-climbing crawler is examined. 

Cover (Fire Fighting Hose) 

Powder 

"f=P\ (Flour 90g)/ 

fflkN a 

a 

/Screw 

(Seal the Powder into Block) 

^v^>wr 

Screw 

Aluminum Plate (Fix the Block on the Belt) 

Fig. 16. Powder-filled block 

Stair Climbing Robots and High-grip Crawler 

83 

5.2 Friction Characteristics of each Block 

For measuring the characteristics of the face material used for the crawler belt of a stair- 
climbing crawler, the experimental device shown in Figure 17 was prepared. An aluminum 
block acts as a stair edge and presses against the measured soft material, applying a 
sideways force. First, the relationship between vertical force and vertical deformation when 
the experimental edge is pressed was measured. Next, for measuring the grip ability against 
the stair edge, vertical and horizontal forces were measured when slight slippage occurred 
due to a horizontal force during vertical loading. The equivalent frictional coefficient for 
each vertical loading is calculated as: 

Equivalent Friction coefficient = 

Horizontal Load (Grip Force) 
Vertical Load 

a) 

The equivalent frictional coefficient is measured for cases of increasing vertical load and 
decreasing vertical load from the maximum load because of the hysteresis characteristics of 
the materials. The measured materials were the newly developed powder-filled block, a 
urethane rubber block with approximately the same vertical deformation, a urethane rubber 
block in the tube used in the newly developed powder-filled block, and the tube itself. The 
size of these experimental materials is the same as that of the powder-filled block, as shown 
in Figure 5 (90L x 50 W x 30H, 100 g). In order to examine the change in the characteristics 
with the diameter of the powder, the blocks were filled with aluminum balls of 3 mm in 
diameter and plastic balls of 6 mm in diameter. 

Weight 

* Frictional force 

Measured block 

u 

n 

Load cell 

Load cell 

Fig. 17. Experimental system 

v 
/ 
/ 
/ 

/ 
/ 

\ 

5.3 Measurement Results of Deformation 

First, the results of a comparison of the deformation between the urethane rubber block and 
the powder-filled block are shown in Figure 18. The same deformation characteristics are 
observed with an increasing vertical load. However, with a decreasing vertical load, the 
powder-filled blocks retain their previous deformation, whereas the urethane rubber blocks 
do not. Next, the results of a comparison of the deformation for different types of powder 

84 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

are shown in Figure 19. This comparison includes the powder-filled block, and the blocks 
contained 3 mm aluminum balls and 6 mm plastic balls. The results show that the blocks 
had approximately the same characteristics in each case of increasing and decreasing loads, 
whereas the maximum deformations differed. Moreover, the results reveal that the blocks 
have large hysteresis characteristics in common. 

1 ' r 

Powder-filled block 

400 600 

Load [N] 

Fig. 18. Characteristics of block deformations 

1000 

20 

n ■ 1 ■ 1 ■ \— 

Plastic balls of 06 [mm] in block 
Powder-filled block 

•«D 

Aluminum balls of </> 3 [mm] in block- 

400 600 

Load [N] 

Fig. 19. Comparison of deformation with inner particle size 

1000 

5.4 Results of Equivalent Frictional Coefficient 

Figure 20 shows the results of the measurements of the equivalent frictional coefficient for 
the four types of blocks: ur ethane rubber block, the tube itself, ur ethane rubber in the tube 
and the powder-filled block. The results show that the equivalent frictional coefficient of the 
powder-filled blocks becomes much higher than the equivalent frictional coefficients of the 
other blocks. A very high equivalent frictional coefficient was obtained in the case of a 
weight reduction. This appears to depend on the hysteresis characteristics of the powder- 
filled block, because the block maintains its deformation after load reduction. This 
characteristic benefits the crawler because larger friction forces can be obtained from the 

Stair Climbing Robots and High-grip Crawler 85 

middle of the crawler belt where the low-pressure area is located, even while climbing stairs, 
as shown in Figure 21. The total friction force of the blocks is expressed as the sum of the 
adhesive friction force, which depends on the face characteristics of the material and the 
friction force due to deformation that occurs during motion. The adhesive friction force 
depends only on the facing material, and the friction force due to deformation depends only 
on the inner materials. For example, friction forces due to deformation are the same between 
the urethane rubber block and the urethane rubber blocks inside the tube. The difference is 
the adhesive friction force due to the face material of the tube. Moreover, the friction force 
due to deformation of the inner powder can be calculated as the total friction force of the 
powder-filled blocks minus the friction of the tube, which is adhesive friction. Thus, the 
ratio of adhesive friction to the friction due to deformation for a specific loading can be 
expressed as shown in Figure 22. Almost all of the friction of the powder-filled blocks is 
attributed to the deformation. Therefore, it appears that a stable grip force can be always 
obtained, despite the grounding state of the environment. However, the friction force of the 
rubber blocks depends on the friction at the surface, and this is not desirable. 
This result also shows that the crawler with the powder-filled belt has a relatively smaller 
friction force on flat surfaces, such as asphalt or concrete. When the crawler moves over a 
flat surface, the powder-filled blocks deform little because the ground presses equally 
towards the powder-filled blocks; little energy is lost by rolling resistance which depends on 
the hysteresis loss. Therefore, the crawler with powder-filled blocks also has better mobility 
for tasks on flat surfaces such as curving or pivot turning (by relatively small surface 
friction) and for climbing stairs (by large frictional force due to deformation). 
Next, the same experiments were performed in order to compare the effects of the size of 
particles and materials. The results are shown in Figure 22, which compares the 3 mm 
diameter aluminum balls with 6 mm plastic balls. The large equivalent frictional coefficient 
and hysteresis characteristics were approximately the same. Therefore, variations in the 
inner material and size do not play a very important role in defining the friction force 
generated by the block. Flour, however, becomes harder and stiff and does not change its 
form once it has been subjected to loads greater than 2500 N. Thus, the size and the 
materials used for the inner powder should be decided according to the intended 
environments and the load carried. Otherwise, the particles can be destroyed and the block 
will no longer be able to change its form. 
After several experiments, the following results were obtained. 

1. Sand can generate large friction forces but is heavy. 

2. The 3 mm diameter aluminum ball can also can generate large friction forces, but is 

also heavy (150 g) and very expensive. 

3. Plastic balls or rice, which is fragile, cannot maintain their frictional performance 
because the characteristics of the particles change as they break into smaller 
particles. 

4. The sack should be composed of a non-expandable material. 

Based on these considerations, we have developed a stair climber with powder-filled blocks 
filled with flour. 

86 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

1.5 

fl0.5 

W 

~1 ' 1 

Powder- filled block 

_ _ «• — — ^ Urethane rubber in tube 

O fr- " ° " *H - ft r flr # D 

100 200 300 400 

Load [N] 

Fig. 20. Characteristics of equivalent coefficient 

500 

.£ 

fTTTTT| 

& 

Fig. 21. Grounding pressure distribution 

Tube 

*^^* Adhesive frictional 

force 

"ethane rubber 
in tube 

Frictional force 

due to deform a ti on 

*«• 

***t**^ 

/ 

•ethane rubber 

'//, 

/ 

^^7*^ 

if 

Powder-filled 
block 

W//////////A 

1 1 1 1 ^ 

100 

2 

00 

30 

3 400 500 ' 

Frictional force [N] 
Fig. 22. Comparison of total friction (at 455 N loading) 

Stair Climbing Robots and High-grip Crawler 

87 

1.5 

" 1 

^0.5 - 

w 

- 

\ 

1 ' 1 ' 1 ' 1 ' 

- 

: 

^^ Aluminum balls of ^ 3 [mm] in block 

: 

-^H Plastic balls of ^6 [mm] in block 

- 

^^— Powder-filled block 

- 

- 

1,1,1,1, 

- 

100 

400 

500 

200 300 

Load [N] 

Fig. 23. Comparison of equivalent coefficients of friction with inner particle size 

6. Design of Crawler Vehicle 

To verify the advantages of using powder-filled blocks when considering stair-climbing 
safety and reliability, the stair-climbing crawler (Yoneda et al., 2001) as shown in Figure 24 
was developed. The climber has a total length of 1180 mm, a width of 830 mm and a weight 
of 65 kg, including the batteries. This vehicle has a maximum speed of 500 mm s- 1 and the 
batteries have a lifespan of 45 min. 

To design the deformable powder-filled tracks a total of 112 powder-filled blocks, which 
were tested from the previous chapter, were attached to each crawler belt (Figure 25). 
Twenty-eight powder-filled blocks are aligned in two rows per belt. The blocks on the left 
and right rows are longitudinally shifted by one-half pitch so as to prevent their gaps from 
coinciding. Thus, the edge of the stair cannot fit within a gap of the block. We can therefore 
omit the effect of gripping by gaps and check the actual grip performance of powder 
deformation. 

This crawler is also equipped with the belt tension mechanism shown in Figure 26, which 
was developed to achieve equally distributed grounding pressure. This crawler is also 
equipped with the active swing idler mechanism shown in Figure 27. This idler is located at 
the same height as the front and rear main idlers in order to achieve grounding pressure at 
the middle area of crawler belt, as shown in Figure 28(a). When the crawler approaches the 
top of the stairs, the swing arm moves and pulls the idler up, bending the crawler belt as 
shown in Figure 28(b). This motion prevents the sudden change of the posture of the crawler. 
When the crawler is required to perform pivot turning, the idler is pushed out and the 
grounding area becomes small, as shown in Figure 28(c). This motion makes pivot turning 
easier on high-friction surfaces, such as an asphalt road. 

88 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 24. Developed stair climber with powder-filled belts to which numerous powder-filled 
blocks are attached 

f 

Fig. 25. Alignment of the powder-filled blocks on the belt 

Fig. 26. Belt tension mechanism 

Stair Climbing Robots and High-grip Crawler 

89 

Fig. 27. Active swing idler mechanism 

Fig. 28. Three states of the crawler: (a) normal use; (b) when the crawler reaches the top of a 
stair; and (c) during pivot turning 

7. Stair-Climbing Experiment 

To verify the abilities of the developed stair-climbing crawler with powder-filled belts, 
comparison experiments between a crawler with powder-filled belts, a crawler with 
grouser-attached tracks (Figure 29) and a crawler with urethane rubber blocks (Figure 30) 
were performed. The stairs used in these experiments have steps of 270 mm in length and 
150 mm in height having R2 edges that are sharper than ordinary stairs. All of the crawlers 
were able to ascend and descend the stairs. In addition the traction forces, which give an 
indication of the margin of stability and payload, were measured. The results of traction 
forces are shown in Table 1. It was observed that the developed crawler with powder-filled 
belts can generate a large traction force that is approximately twice as large as that of the 
crawler with urethane rubber blocks. The crawler with grouser-attached tracks was able to 
generate large traction forces when the grousers achieve a good grip on the stair edges. 
However, as mentioned above, slippage or spinning has been observed when the support 
point changes. Figure 31 shows the measurement of the pitching angle of the inclination 
while ascending the stairs. The crawler with grouser-attached tracks generates a larger 
change in inclination angle than the crawlers with powder-filled belts and urethane rubber 
blocks. 

Furthermore, the crawler with powder-filled belts was able to climb steeper stairs (step 
length 270 mm, step height 160 mm and edge radius 5 mm), although the crawler with 
urethane rubber blocks could not ascend because of an insufficient grip force. Moreover, 
climbing experiments involving the crawlers moving on stairs in non-straight trajectories 
were performed. Although the crawler with grouser-attached tracks could not ascend the 
stairs because the grousers could not obtain a sufficient traction from the stair edges, the 

90 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

crawler with powder-filled belts could ascend and descend the stairs stably. In addition, the 
crawler with powder-filled belts can also adjust its path to the right or to the left stably 
while ascending and descending stairs. Thus, climbing spiral stairs, which is a difficult task 
for most conventional stair-climbing vehicles, can be realized. The developed crawler with 
powder-filled belts can carry the heavy loads, as shown in Figure 32, and the maximum 
pay load capacity is approximately 60 kg when ascending 30 degrees stairs. Furthermore, it 
was confirmed that the change in the posture becomes smooth at the top of the stairs and 
easy pivot turning is performed even if the grounding pressure becomes high because of the 
heavy load on the belt tension mechanism and active swing idler mechanism. 

Fig. 29. Crawler with grouser-attached tracks 

Fig. 30. Crawler with urethane rubber blocks 

Stair Climbing Robots and High-grip Crawler 

91 

2 3 

Time [sec] 

(a) 

0.6 

1 i ' i ' i 

1 1 

0.5 

-.A^V^W, 

-A- 

i 1 i 1 i 1 

i i 

2 3 

Time [sec.] 

2 3 

Time [sec.] 

(c) 
Fig. 31. Pitch angle variation of stair climbing with (a) powder-filled belts; (b) urethane 
rubber belts; and (c) grouser-attached tracks. 

8. Conclusion 

We describe a practical stair-climbing crawler and the mechanisms required to obtain 
sufficient grip force on the stairs. We developed powder-filled belts, which consists of 
several powder-filled blocks attached to the surface of the crawler belt, and compared the 
characteristics between the powder-filled blocks and other conventionally used materials. 
The results reveal that after the powder-filled belts deform to match the stair edge, the belts 
become harder and are therefore able to keep their shapes. This hysteresis characteristic of 
the attached powder-filled blocks is due to the fact that the powder flow generates a large 
equivalent friction coefficient at the middle area of the crawler belt, where there is a lower 
grounding pressure area after the pressure has been increased once. This has been verified 
experimentally. 

92 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

After these experimental verifications, we used this high-grip climber for practical 
application in helping to carry heavy baggage. We can use the developed climber under 
several ground conditions with a variety of frictional conditions, such as asphalt, concrete 
and carpet. Several types of stairs, such as steep stairs (approximately 50 degrees), spiral 
stairs, narrow stairs, round edged stairs and wet stairs, were also ascended and descended 
successfully. Under these difficult conditions, the powder-filled belt and composed blocks 
always deliver sufficient grip force without breaking down. These findings reveal that the 
newly developed stair-climbing crawler with powder-filled belts has sufficient durability for 
practical application. 

Fig. 32. Ascending stairs while carrying heavy objects 

Powder-filled belt 

441 

Urethane rubber belt 

226 

Grouser-attached tracks 

> 490 

Table 1. Results of traction force experiments (N). 

9. References 

Arai, M.; Tanaka, Y.; Hirose, S.; Tsukui, S. & Kuwahara, H. (2006). Improved Driving 
Mechanism for Connected Crawler Vehicle "Souryu-IV" for in Rubble Searching 
Operations. Proceedings of IEEE International Workshop on Safety Security and Rescue 
Robotics (SSRR2006), pp. TUE-AM 1-1, August 2006, Washington, USA, 

Granosik, G.; Hansen, M. & Borenstein, J. (2005). The OmniTread Serpentine Robot for 
Industrial Inspection and Surveillance, International Journal of Industrial Robots, No. 
32, Vol.2, 139-148 

Stair Climbing Robots and High-grip Crawler 93 

Hirose, S.; Aoki, S. & Miyake, J. (1989). Terrain Adaptive Tracked Vehicle HELIOS-I, 

Proceedings of 4th International Conference on Advanced Robotics, pp. 676-687 
Hirose, S.; Aoki, S. & Miyake, J. (1990). Design and Control of Quadru-Truck Crawler 

Vehicle HELIOS-II, Proceedings of 8th RoManSy Symposium, pp. 1-10. 
Hirose, S.; Usa, M.; Ohmori, N.; Aoki, S. & Tsuruzawa, K. (1991). Terrain Adaptive Quadru- 

Track Vehicle HELIOSIII, Proceedings of 9th Annual Conference on RS], pp. 305-306 

(in Japanese) 
Hirose, S.; Sensu, T. & Aoki, S. (1992). The TAQT Carrier: A Pratical Terrain- Adaptive 

Quadru-Track Carrier Robot, Proceedings of IEEE/RS] International Conference on 

Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 2068-2073 
Hirose S.; Yoneda K.; Arai K. & Ibe T. (1995). Design of a quadruped walking vehicle for 

dynamic walking and stair climbing, Advanced Robotics, Vol.9, No. 2, 107-124 
Hirose S.; Fukuda Y.; Yoneda K.; Nagakubo A.; Tsukagoshi H.; Arikawa K.; Endo G., Doi T. 

& Hodoshima R. (2009). Quadruped Walking Robots at Tokyo Institute of 

Technology, IEEE Robotics and Automation Magazine, Vol.16, No. 2, 104-114 
Krishna M.; Bares J. & Mutschler Ed, (1997). Tethering System Design for Dante II, 

Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 1100-1105 
Liu, J.; Wang, Y.; Ma, S. & Li, B. (2005). Analysis of Stairs- Climbing Ability for a Tracked 

Reconfigurable Modular Robot, Proceedings of IEEE International Workshop on Safety, 

Security and Rescue Robotics, pp. 36-41, Kobe, Japan 
Miyanaka, H.; Wada, N.; Kamegawa, T.; Sato, N.; Tsukui, S.; Igarashi, H. & Matsuno, F. 

(2007). Development of a unit type robot "KOHGA2" with stuck avoidance ability, 

Proceedings of 2007 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 

pp.3877-3882. Roma, Italy 
Murphy R. Robin (2000). Biomimetic Search for Urban Search and Rescue, Proceedings of the 

IEEE/RS] Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 2073-2078, Takamatsu Japan, October 

2000 
Ota, Y.; Yoneda, K.; Ito, F.; Hirose, S. & Inagaki, Y. (2001a). Design and Control of 6-DOF 

Mechanism for Twin-Frame Mobile Robot, Autonomous Robots, Vol.lO,No.3, 297-316 
Ota, Y.; Yoneda, K.; Muramatsu, Y.; & Hirose S. (2001b). Development of Walking and Task 

Performing Robot with Bipedal Configuration, Proceedings of 2001 IEEE/RS] 

International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp.247-252, Hawaii USA 
Ota Y.; Yoneda K., Tamaki T. & Hirose S. (2002), A Walking and Wheeled Hybrid 

Locomotion with Twin-Frame Structure Robot, Proceedings of 2002 IEEE/RS] 

International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp.2645-2651, Lausanne 

Switzerland 
Ota Y.; Tamaki T.; Yoneda K. & Hirose S. (2003), Development of Walking Manipulator with 

Versatile Locomotion, Proceedings of 2003 IEEE International Conference on Robotics 

and Automation, pp.477-483, Taipei Taiwan, September 2003 
Ota Y.; Kuga T. & Yoneda K. (2006). Deformation Compensation for Continuous Force 

control of a Wall Climbing Quadruped with Reduced-DOF, Proceedings of 2006 

IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp.468-474, Florida USA, 

May 2006 
Schempf, H.; Mutschler, E.; Piepgras, C; Warwick, J.; Chemel, B.; Boehmke, S.; Crowley, W.; 

Fuchs, R. & Guyot, J. (1999). Pandora: Autonomous Urban Robotic Reconnaissance 

System, Proceedings of International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 2315- 

2321, Detroit USA, May 1999 

94 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Stoeter A. Sascha; Rybski E. Paul; Gini Maria & Papanikolopoulos Nikolao (2002). 

Autonomous Stair-Hopping with Scout Robots, Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ 

Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 721-726, 2002 
Taguchi, K. (1995). Enhanced wheel system for step climbing, Advanced Robotics, Vol.9, No.2, 

137-147 
Takahashi M.; Yoneda K. & Hirose S.(2006). Rough Terrain Locomotion of a Leg- Wheel 

Hybrid Quadruped Robot, Proceedings of 2006 IEEE International Conference on 

Robotics and Automation, pp.1090-1095, Florida USA, May 2006 
Takayama T. & Hirose S. (2000). Development of Souryu-I : Connected Crawler Vehicle for 

Inspection of Narrow and Winding Space, Proceedings of IEEE International 

Conference on Industrial Electronics, Control and Instrumentation (IECON-2000), 

pp.143-149 
Tanaka, Y.; Arai, M.; Hirose, S. & Tsukui, S. (2006). Development of "Souryu-V" with Mono- 
Tread-Crawlers and Elastic-Rods Joint. Proceedings of IEEE International Workshop on 

Safety Security and Rescue Robotics (SSRR2006), pp. TUE-AM 1-1, Washington, USA, 
Tsukagoshi H.; Sasaki M.; Kitagawa A. 6 Tanaka T. (2005). Design of a higher jumping 

rescue robot with the optimized pneumatic drive, Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE 

International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 1288-1295 
Uchida, Y.; Furuichi, K. & Hirose, S. (1999). Consideration of stair-climbing performance of a 

six-wheeled off -road vehicle 'HELIOS- V, Proceedings of 2nd International Conference 

on Climbing and Walking Robots, pp. 383-391 
Uchida, Y.; Furuichi, K. & Hirose, S. (2000). Evaluation of Wheel Performance on Rough 

Terrain and Development of HS Wheel. Journal of Robotics and Mechatronics, Vol.12, 

No.5, 586-595 
Yim M.; Duff D. & Roufas K. (2000). Modular Reconfigurable Robots, An Approach To 

Urban Search and Rescue, Proceedings of 1st International Workshop on Human- 
friendly Welfare Robotic Systems, pp.69-76 
Yoneda K. (1987). The Development of Biped Walking Robot for HC-plane, 5th Annual conf 

of The Robotics Society of Japan, pp.585-586 (in Japanese) 
Yoneda, K.; Iiyama, H. & Hirose, S. (2000). Active Suspension Control of Quadruped 

Walking Robot, Machine Intelligence and Robotic Control (MIROC), Vol.2, No.2, 45-50 
Yoneda K.; Ota Y.; Ito F. & Hirose S. (2001a). Quadruped Walking Robot with Reduced 

Degrees of Freedom, Journal of Robotics and Mechatronics, Vol.13, No.2, 190-197 
Yoneda K.; Ota Y.; Hirano K. & Hirose S. (2001b). Development of a Light- Weight Wall 

Climbing Quadruped with Reduced Degrees of Freedom, Proceedings of 4th 

International Conference on Climbing and Walking Robots, pp. 907-912, Karlsruhe 

Germany 
Yoneda K. & Ota Y. (2003) : Non-Bio-Mimetic Walkers, The International Journal of Robotics 

Research, Vol. 22 No.3-4, 241-249 
Yoneda K (2007). Light weight Quadruped with Nine Actuators, Journal of Robotics and 

Mechatronics, Vol.19, No.2, 160-165 
Yoneda, K.; Ota, Y. & Hirose, S. (2009) Development of a Hi-Grip Stair Climbing Crawler 

with Hysteresis Compliant Blocks, The International Journal of Robotics Research, Vol. 

28, No.l, 81-89 

A Climbing-Flying Robot 
for Power Line Inspection 

Jaka Katrasnik, Franjo Pernus and Bostjan Likar 

University of Ljubljana 
Slovenia 

1. Introduction 

Our society is becoming increasingly more dependent on reliable electric power supply. 
Since power outages cause substantial financial losses to the producers, distributors and also 
to the consumers of electric power, it is in the common interest to minimize failures on 
power lines. To detect the defects early and to accordingly schedule the maintenance 
activities, the distribution networks are inspected regularly. Inspection of overhead power 
lines is usually done manually, either directly on the lines or indirectly from the ground 
and/ or from the helicopters. All these tasks are tedious, expensive, time consuming and 
dangerous. Consequentially, more and more research has been focused on automating the 
inspection process by means of mobile robots that would possibly surpass the 
abovementioned disadvantages. Namely, robot-assisted inspection could be carried out 
faster, cheaper and more reliable, thus improving the long-term stability and reliability of 
electric power supply. Most importantly, the safety of the inspection workers could be 
increased significantly. 

In this chapter the requirements for all types of robots for power line inspection and the key 
research problems and proposed solutions for flying and climbing robots are surveyed. Next, 
a new so-called climbing-flying robot, which inherits most of the advantages of climbing 
and flying robots, is proposed. The proposed robot is critically assessed and related to the 
other inspection robots in terms of design and construction, inspection quality, autonomy 
and universality. In conclusion, the remaining research challenges in the field of power line 
inspection that will need to be addressed in the future are outlined. 

2. Robot Requirements 

2.1 Power Line Features and Faults 

Power lines are a dangerous environment. The electric potential differences between the 
lines are in the order of 100 kV, yielding the electric field in the vicinity of the lines close to 
15 kV/cm under normal conditions and even more in the presence of defects. The magnetic 
field is not small either, due to the currents that are in the order of 1000 A the magnetic field 

Based on "New Robot for Power Line Inspection", by Jaka Katrasnik, Franjo Pernus and Bostjan Likar 
which appeared in 2008 IEEE Conference on Robotics, Automation and Mechatronics. © 2008 IEEE. 

96 Climbing and Walking Robots 

on the surface of the conductor reaches values as high as 10 mT. Power lines are also a 
complex environment, difficult for robots to navigate. The simplest power lines have one 
conductor per phase, while others may have more. The conductors are hung on insulator 
strings, which can either be suspension insulators or strain insulators. Besides insulators, 
there are other obstacles on the conductors, such as dampers, spacers, aircraft warning lights 
and clamps (Fig. 1). 

The faults on the power lines usually occur on conductors and insulator strings (Aggarwal 
et al., 2000). Aeolian vibrations gradually cause mechanical damage to conductors. Strands 
brake, the conductor loses its strength and starts overheating. Other important conductor 
damaging factors are the corona effect and corrosion. Insulator strings are also prone to 
mechanical damage due to impact, weather and corrosion (Aggarwal et al., 2000). During 
inspection, it is also necessary to check for vegetation on and beneath power lines, pylon 
and other power line equipment condition and safety distance between conductors and 
other objects. 

(b) 

(c) (d) (e) 

Fig. 1. Obstacles on conductors: (a) suspension insulator, (b) strain insulator, (c) damper, (d) 
spacer and (e) aircraft warning light. 

2.2 Robot Functionality 

The design of the robot determines its functionality. In helicopter-assisted inspection the 
helicopter is flown along the power lines and the camera operator has to track and film the 
lines with a normal, IR and UV camera. The video footage is then carefully inspected on the 
ground. This is a very quick method of inspection but tedious for the camera operator and 
quite inaccurate. That is why the requirements for the automation system are automatic 
power line tracking, automatic visual inspection and automatic measurement of power line 
safety distance. Another problem that needs to be solved for these systems to work is also 
the acquisition of high-quality images, which is very important for visual power line 
tracking and visual inspection. 

Similar problems need to be solved when developing an UAV (Unmanned Aerial Vehicle) 
for power line inspection. A small helicopter is usually used for the UAV, because it has the 

A Climbing-Flying Robot for Power Line Inspection 97 

ability to hover. The UAV has to be able to autonomously travel along the power lines, find 
and document faults. It also has to be as energy-independent as possible. The problems 
associated with this approach are similar to those of helicopter-assisted inspection, but even 
more demanding. The key issues are position control, automatic power line tracking, 
obstacle avoidance, communication, image acquisition, automatic fault detection, measuring 
power line safety distance and power pick-up from the power line. 

Another inspection approach, which has been developed for many years, is the climbing 
robot. The robot travels suspended from the conductor and has to cross obstacles along the 
power line, which requires complex robotic mechanisms. The robot functionality should 
include autonomous traveling along the conductor, automatic visual inspection and at least 
semi-autonomous obstacle crossing. The main problems associated with this approach are 
thus robotic mechanism design and construction, the conductor grasping system, the 
driving system, conductor obstacle detection and recognition, the robot control system, 
communication, visual inspection, power supply and electromagnetic shielding. 

3. Automated Helicopter Inspection 

One of the first articles on automating helicopter-assisted inspection (Whitworth et al., 2001) 
addressed some of the problems, specifically, tracking the power line, especially the poles 
that need careful inspection, and image acquisition stabilization. A tracking algorithm for 
power line poles was developed and tested on a scaled laboratory test rig. The initial 
position of the pole would be obtained with DGPS (Differential Global Positioning System). 
The pole recognition was done on the basis of two vertical lines and the two horizontal lines 
of the top cross arm. The reported success rate of the pole recognition algorithm was 65-92% 
on videos recorded at helicopter inspection, but the image processing rate of 2 to 8 images 
per second was rather small and the recognition did not work well when background was 
cluttered. The authors concluded that the concept is feasible, although problems with 
robustness could arise in real environments with complex backgrounds and varying lighting 
conditions. Visual tracking of the poles with corner detection and matching was 
investigated in (Golightly and Jones, 2003). For corner detection the zoom invariant CVK 
(named by the authors: Cooper, Venkatesh, Kitchen) method described in (Cooper et al., 
1993) was proposed. The method was found suitable for corner detection at the tops of the 
power line poles. Because the method detects multiple matches for one physical corner, 
detected corners have to be aggregated. Corner matching is then done on two consecutive 
images, using a basic corner matcher. Relatively good stability of the whole system was 
reported. 

For accurate inspection, the quality of images taken from the helicopter has to be as good as 
possible. Images taken from an on board camera often get blurred, due to constant vibration 
and translational movement of the helicopter. In (Jones and Earp, 2001) this problem was 
thoroughly investigated and minimal optical stabilization requirements defined. Small 
movements of the helicopter can be compensated by mounting the camera on gyro- 
stabilized gimbals, which lock the sightline to an inertial reference. Translational helicopter 
movement can only be compensated with visual tracking of the inspected object. It was 
found that for sufficient inspection detail, the image blur should not be more than 1% and 
that the stabilized platform must achieve optical stabilization better than 100-200 |ur (micro 
radians). 

98 Climbing and Walking Robots 

4. Inspection with an UAV 

Inspection with an UAV is an upgrade of automated helicopter inspection so both concepts 
have some common problems. An evaluation of using an UAV for power line inspection 
(Jones and Earp, 1996) indicated that this inspection method could be faster than foot patrol 
and would yield the same or better accuracy than costly helicopter inspection. It was 
concluded that the system is feasible from a technical point of view. The concept was further 
investigated in (Jones, 2005). A small electrically driven rotorcraft, which can pick up energy 
from power lines, was presented. This vehicle would be equipped with gyro-stabilized 
cameras, navigation and position regulation, a computer for image and other sensor data 
processing, a communication link and a system for electric power pick up. Power would be 
obtained from the power line using a pantograph mechanism. The most research was 
devoted to the development of a vision system for power line tracking and to image quality 
assurance. Namely, good power line tracking is important for visual position control and 
navigation, while image quality is of utmost importance for inspection purposes. 

4.1 Position Control 

Since power lines have to be inspected from a small distance but must under no 
circumstances get damaged even in strong wind, position control of the UAV is difficult yet 
very important. Because conductors have to be in the field of view of the camera almost all 
the time, determining position of the helicopter visually from the images of the conductors 
seems very attractive (Campoy et al., 2001, Golightly and Jones, 2005, Jones et al., 2006). 
Position control is thus closely related to automatic tracking of power lines. The helicopter is 
a very complex, unstable and nonlinear system with cross couplings. In (Campoy et al., 2001) 
a Linear Quadratic Gaussian (LQG) controller was chosen for roll and pitch control and a 
PID controller for yaw control. The controllers were implemented on the basis of measured 
dynamic characteristics of the helicopter. Because only position of the helicopter could be 
measured, all other required variables were estimated by the Kalman filter. The robustness 
was tested when the helicopter was in hover by pulling it with a cable. The regulation 
worked well in the presence of such external disturbances. 

A rotorcraft model and a position control system for a power line inspection robot were also 
presented in (Jones et al., 2006). A mathematical model of a ducted-fan rotorcraft with the 
center of gravity above the aircraft center was derived and used for the development of 
control system. The control was achieved by moving a mass, positioned above the center of 
gravity, left or right. When the mass is moved, the craft tilts in the same direction and 
accelerates in that direction. The control system is closely linked with visual tracking of 
power lines and controls the height and lateral position of the craft to the lines. Lateral 
position and height are both measured with image analysis. 

4.2 Automatic Power Line Tracking 

Visual tracking of power lines with an UAV is similar to visual tracking with a helicopter. 
The only major difference is that the UAV can get closer to the lines. The tracking methods 
are therefore a little different. Jones and Golightly developed a simple tracking algorithm 
that could track the power line with three lines based on the Hough Transform (Jones et al., 
2006). The main purpose of this tracking algorithm was to provide height and lateral 
displacement of the vehicle to the control system. The method was tested on a scaled model 

A Climbing-Flying Robot for Power Line Inspection 99 

and was proven to be successful even when the background was cluttered. Another method 
for visual power line tracking (Campoy et al., 2001) utilized a vector-gradient Hough 
transform for line detection. Only one line was tracked and simultaneously inspected. The 
position of the helicopter with regard to the line was determined with stereo vision. 

4.3 Obstacle Avoidance 

Another problem related to robot mobility is obstacle avoidance and path planning. The 
space around power lines is usually obstacle free; nevertheless, the robot must be able to 
avoid obstacles on its way, when it is not controlled by a human operator. A computer 
vision solution to this problem was proposed (Williams et al., 2001). Positions of the 
obstacles were determined by optical flow. The obtained positions were used in the path 
planning algorithm based on the distance transform. The algorithms were tested in a 
laboratory environment using a test rig with a scaled version of a power line. It was 
established that the principles used were correct but the method was sensitive to the 
variations in background, lighting and perspective. An important problem was also the 
computing power because image analysis demands were high and rapid obstacle detection 
was required. 

4.4 Power Supply 

An important characteristic of an inspection vehicle is the duration of its power supply. The 
longer the craft can stay operational the more lines can be inspected. Current battery 
technology does not permit long durations of flight for small electrically driven helicopters. 
Power lines are an abundant source of energy but obtaining that power is far from trivial. A 
concept of a power line power pick-up device was presented in (Jones, 2007). The power 
would be acquired by touching two lines of different phases with a special pantograph 
mechanism (Fig. 2). For this concept to work, line tracking and position control algorithms 
have to be highly reliable. 

Fig. 2. The proposed pantograph power pick-up mechanism 

4.5 Other Problems 

A difficult problem that has not been researched thoroughly is automatic power line fault 
detection. It would be most convenient if the robot would be able to automatically detect 
faults on-site, so it could re-inspect them more thoroughly. On the other hand, automatic 
fault detection could be done in the ground station after the inspection, which would be 

100 Climbing and Walking Robots 

easier to implement but would not provide detailed information about the defects. A big 
difficulty with fault detection is the quality of images taken from the UAV. Because of the 
distance from the line and constant movement of the craft, the quality of images is usually 
poor, which makes automatic fault detection especially demanding. 

A big problem with the UAV concept of inspection is that almost every system on the robot 
(position control, obstacle avoidance, fault detection and power pick up) depends on visual 
tracking of power lines, which is not very reliable. Although visual power line tracking was 
successful in the laboratory, the real environment is much more demanding. Contrast 
between the lines and the background is usually very low. Lighting varies a great deal and 
depends on unpredictable weather conditions. The UAV is in constant motion and vibrates, 
so the images acquired by the robot would be of a poor quality and the faults very difficult 
to detect even for a human. Unintentional detection of other straight lines on the image, 
such as other power lines or railroad tracks, would also pose a serious problem. 

5. Climbing Robots 

An alternative approach to power line inspection is by means of a climbing robot, which can 
climb on the conductor and has to somehow overcome all various obstacles on the power 
lines. The main advantage of this concept is the inspection accuracy. Namely, close 
proximity to the line and low vibrations increase the quality of image acquisition. On the 
other hand, development of a robot mechanism for overcoming obstacles on the line is 
extremely difficult. The main research problem with climbing robots is therefore the 
development of a robot mechanism and a control system for obstacle crossing. The 
proximity of the conductor also brings problems related to electromagnetic shielding. 
Sensitive electronics and sensors have to be protected from the electric and magnetic fields 
of the conductor. 

5.1 Robot Mechanisms and Obstacle Traversing 

One of the first operational robot mechanisms for power line inspection was the robot 
presented in (Sawada et al., 1991). The robot consisted of a drive, an arc shaped rail, a guide 
rail manipulator and a balancer with controller. It could travel on slopes of up to 30°. When 
the robot would come across an obstacle it would unpack its rail and mount it on the 
conductor on both sides of the obstacle. Then the drive mechanism would release the 
conductor and travel on the rail to the other side. The robot was able to negotiate towers and 
other equipment on overhead ground wires. Not having proper shielding and mechanisms 
for overcoming obstacles, the proposed robot could not travel on phase conductors. 
A more complex robot mechanism, presented in (Tang et al., 2004), had two arms (front arm 
and rear arm) and a body. Each arm had 4 degrees of freedom and a gripper with a running 
wheel. The body also had a running wheel with a gripper. When overcoming obstacles, the 
robot would release the conductor with the front arm, elongate it over the obstacle and 
grasp the conductor on the other side. Then the body would release and the two arms 
would move it across the obstacle, where it would grip the conductor again. Finally, the rear 
arm would move across the obstacle. This robot could overcome all standard obstacles on 
phase conductors of overhead power lines. However, it could not travel on bundled 
conductors. 

A Climbing-Flying Robot for Power Line Inspection 

101 

The robot configuration in (Xinglong et al., 2006) had two arms and a special gripper 
combined with a driving wheel. The specialty of this mechanism is that the gripper could 
always grasp the conductor, when it was in contact with the running wheel. The gripper 
presses on the conductor from the left and right side of the wheel. The main disadvantage 
was that the gripper could not handle large torque, which can easily occur when crossing 
obstacles. For that reason, a special very effective obstacle crossing strategy that also 
simplifies the design of the robot was presented (Fig. 3). When the robot would detect an 
obstacle ahead, it would stop, grasp the conductor with the front arm and move its body 
under the front arm in order to minimize the torque when crossing the obstacle (Fig. 3(a)). 
Next, the rear arm would lift the running wheel up and the front arm would rotate the robot 
around its own axis. Finally, the rear arm would lower the wheel on the conductor (Fig. 
3(b)). The same process would then be repeated with the arms' roles changed. Because of 
this obstacle traversing strategy, the robot arms need only two degrees of freedom, the 
torques in the joints and on the conductor are small and, consequently, the motors do not 
need to be as powerful and heavy. 

(a) (b) 

Fig. 3. Obstacle traversing strategy proposed in (Xinglong et al., 2006). 

5.2 Robot Control System 

The main purpose of the robot control system is to navigate the robot over obstacles on the 
line. One of the first robot control algorithms for power line inspection was described in 
(Sawada et al., 1991). A more complex control system, using a distributed expert system that 
was divided between the robot and the ground station, was described in (Tang et al., 2004). 
The robot control system would run on an embedded PC/ 104 based computer, connected to 
the ground station with a wireless data link and a separate image transmission channel. The 
robot expert system consisted of an inference engine, knowledge base, static database, 
external information input module and decision-making module. The inference engine 
would decide what commands to execute on the basis of sensor information and 
information in the static database. Sensors would provide information about current 
position of the robot and the obstacles around it, while the static database would contain 
data about towers and other obstacles on the line. The robot expert system would plan the 
path of the robot arms so that the robot would overcome the obstacle successfully. The 
ground station would be used for monitoring and guiding the robot as well as for detecting 

102 Climbing and Walking Robots 

faults on the power line from the images sent by the robot. Similar distributed expert system 
designs were presented in (Ludan et al., 2006). 

5.3 Obstacle Detection and Recognition 

Obstacle detection is usually done with a proximity sensor, which is simple yet effective but 
the detection of the obstacle is usually not enough to overcome it. In most cases the type of 
the obstacle has to be known. In (Zhang et al., 2006) a computer vision method for obstacle 
recognition and distance measurement was presented. The method determines the obstacle 
types from the shapes on the image. An ellipse represents a suspension insulator string and 
two circles left and right of the conductor a strain insulator string. After the obstacle is 
recognized, its position is also located with a stereo vision. The method was tested on a real 
power line for which the accuracy of 7 % or better was reported. Another important 
problem associated with visual obstacle detection and recognition is the elimination of 
motion blur from the captured images (Fu et al., 2006). Although climbing robot is fixed on 
the conductor, it also swings under the influence of wind and when traveling along the line. 

5.4 Power Supply 

Power lines could provide the inspection robot with energy for its operation. Energy from 
the line could be extracted from the magnetic field of the line. This concept was presented in 
(Peungsungwal et al., 2001). A magnetic iron core was placed around the conductor. Current 
induced in the secondary coil around the core was measured at different numbers of 
windings of the secondary. It was shown that the current reaches its maximum value at a 
certain number of secondary windings and that the power transferred to the secondary coil 
increases with the current of the power line. 

6. Climbing-Flying Robot 

The abovementioned advantageous features of both robot types can be combined. For that 
reason, we propose a new robot type, i.e. the so-called climbing-flying robot (Fig. 4). The 
proposed robot would combine a helicopter for flying over the obstacles and a special drive 
mechanism for traveling on the conductor. During inspection, the robot would travel on the 
conductor up to an obstacle. Then it would fly off the conductor over the obstacle, land on 
the other side and continue traveling along the conductor. Traveling on the conductor 
would be automated, while flying over the obstacles would likely have to be done manually. 
Some of the problems that would need to be solved are similar to those described in the two 
previous sections. For instance, power pick-up system, obstacle detection and recognition, 
and drive mechanism for traveling on the conductor. Besides the advantages that arise from 
the proposed combination of the two robot types, there are also some specific new problems, 
which we address in the following. 

6.1 Robot design 

Design of the climbing-flying robot is much more difficult than design of the flying robot, 
although not as difficult as design of the climbing robot. When designing the proposed 
robot one must take into consideration the weight limitations of the helicopter, which are 
much stricter than for the flying robot. The reason for this is the addition of the drive 

A Climbing-Flying Robot for Power Line Inspection 

103 

mechanism and the electromagnetic shielding, which significantly increase the weight of the 
robot. 

Another major problem is also the weight distribution in the robot. In order to achieve a 
good degree of stability on the power line, the center of gravity of the robot must be below 
the conductor. This conflicts with the design of the helicopter, where the majority of the 
weight is placed directly below the rotor to achieve good maneuverability. The parts of the 
robot must therefore be carefully positioned to achieve the optimal position of the center of 
gravity. A coarse distribution of robot parts inside the robot is proposed in Fig. 4. 

cameras for inspection, 

temperature measurement 

and corona detection 

motor 
and rotor control 

drive mechanism 

visual inspection 

of the conductor 

batteries 

fuel 

other 
equipment 

power pick-up device 

(a) 

Fig. 4. The proposed robot: (a) An illustration of the proposed climbing-flying robot and its 
components; (b) a sketch of the robot from the front, showing the rails for easier landing on 
conductors and equipment placement for stability. 

Setting the weight limitation and distribution problems aside, the most important problems 
of the climbing-flying robot are the design of individual systems, which are the helicopter, 
drive mechanism, visual inspection system, power pick-up device and communication 
system. The design of these systems is discussed in the following subsections. 

104 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

6.2 Helicopter 

When choosing the rotor configuration of the helicopter for the climbing-flying robot we 
have three choices. The most common is the Sikorsky configuration. Ninety percent of all 
the helicopters in the world are made in this configuration. It is simple to produce, has good 
maneuverability and sufficient lift. The tandem rotors configuration has worse 
maneuverability, but produces more lift as there is no power needed for balancing the main 
rotor torque. This configuration is also more difficult to make and maintain, as it has more 
moving parts and a more complex design. The coaxial rotors configuration is also more 
expensive to build and maintain. However it requires less space, while producing the same 
amount of lift as the other two configurations. This results in a smaller and more 
maneuverable helicopter for the same payload limitations. In comparison to the Sikorsky 
configuration the coaxial configuration has better maneuverability but is more expensive 
and has more frequent maintenance. For the climbing-flying robot the coaxial configuration 
is therefore the best choice. 

6.3 Drive mechanism 

The drive mechanism would consist of the front and the rear drive mechanism. Each of the 
two drive mechanisms would consist of two wheels (Fig. 5). The upper wheel would be the 
drive wheel while the lower wheel would provide stability for the robot on the power line. 
The drive wheel would be connected to an electrical motor with a drive chain, whereas the 
lower support wheel would run freely. The wheels would be made of aluminum and the 
conductor contact surfaces of the wheels would be covered with conductive rubber to 
increase traction, damp vibrations and to keep the robot on the same electric potential as the 
conductor. 

Grasping the conductor would be done with the support wheel. At landing the robot would 
sit down onto the drive wheels with the help of special rails (Fig. 4(b) and Fig. 5). After the 
robot would be positioned on the drive wheels the support wheels would be moved into 
position with servomotors. The contact force with the conductor would be applied with 
springs. Before takeoff, the support wheels would be retracted and the robot would be free 
to lift off the conductor. 

Fig. 5. A part of the proposed drive mechanism. After the robot lands on the conductor the 
lower wheels grasp the conductor from the sides. 

A Climbing-Flying Robot for Power Line Inspection 

105 

6.4 Visual inspection system 

Visual inspection of the conductor would consist of two systems. Visual inspection system 
at the front of the robot would perform visual inspection of the power line and obstacle 
detection with a wide angle camera. Visual inspection of the power line would consist of 
detection of conductor, insulator, supporting tower and other equipment defects. As visual 
detection of defects on all these different systems would not be very reliable, the conductor 
would be more accurately inspected with the second visual inspection system, while defects 
on other equipment would be detected with infrared and ultraviolet cameras, also a part of 
the front visual inspection system. Infrared cameras would be used to easily detect 
overheating of any part of the power line equipment. Ultraviolet cameras, on the other hand, 
would make detection of corona, which is usually a sign of a defect, fairly straightforward. 
The second visual inspection system inside the robot would perform a more accurate visual 
inspection of the conductor. This visual inspection system would consist of three line scan 
cameras placed around the conductor 120 degrees apart (Fig. 6(b)). The conductor would be 
illuminated with two LED based lights for each camera (Fig. 6(a)). The lights would be 
placed on both sides of the cameras. This lighting configuration would provide diffuse 
illumination of the conductor, which would enable efficient visual defect detection. For 
triggering the line scan cameras an incremental encoder on one of the wheels of the drive 
mechanism would be used. 

(a) 

(b) 

Fig. 6. Conductor visual inspection system, (a) Illumination, camera and conductor 
configuration for one camera, (b) Camera configuration around the conductor. 

6.5 Power pick-up device 

The power pick-up device consists of two parts, the toroidal core and the clasping 
mechanism. The toroidal core (Fig. 7) is made from a ferromagnetic iron core and is split 
into two halves. On each half is a winding that transforms the energy of the magnetic field 
in the iron core to electrical energy, which is then further treated with a special converter 
circuit to obtain a useable voltage to power the systems onboard the robot. The converter 
must be capable of handling a large range of input voltages as the voltage in the winding 
changes linearly with the power line current. The clasping mechanism takes care of the 
closing and opening of the toroidal core after landing and before takeoff (Fig. 8). It is 
extremely important that the clasping mechanism closes the two halves of the toroidal core 
as closely together as possible, as even a small slit between the two halves significantly 
affects the efficiency of the power pick-up device. Its precision is therefore of great 
importance. 

106 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

A very important parameter of the power pick-up device is its power to weight ratio. It is 
crucial that a power pick-up device is as light as possible, as weight is limited on the robot. 
The power produced by the power pick-up device depends on the power line current and 
also on the geometry of the toroidal core. An analysis of the power to weight ratio in 
dependence of the geometry of the power pick-up device has to be performed to determine 
the feasibility of this device. A preliminary analysis was done in (Katrasnik, 2007). The 
analysis showed that such a power pick-up device is feasible, as the power to weight ratio of 
more than 250 W/kg can be achieved for a relatively small 400 A power line current. 

power line = 
iron core primary winding 

secondary 
winding 

Fig. 7. The power pick-up device. 

6.6 Communication 

In order to guide the robot over the obstacles effectively the operator needs real-time visual 
feedback about the robot's surroundings, while the guiding data have to be sent with 
minimal latency. For this reasons, a reliable high bandwidth wireless data link with very 
low latency is required. Another requirement, which somehow conflicts with the high 
bandwidth requirement, is long communication distance that should reach at least 5 
kilometers for an efficient operation. 

(a) 

(b) 

Fig. 8. The power pick-up device with the clasping mechanism, (a) Opened power pick-up 
device, (b) Closed power pick-up device. 

7. Comparison of robot types 

Because it is not practically feasible to objectively assess all three robot types, we decided to 
conduct a subjective scoring of the three inspection concepts according to some important 
characteristics. Specifically, we selected and weighted four evaluation categories (table I): 
design and construction requirements (weight 4), inspection quality (weight 3), autonomy at 
inspection, obstacle avoidance and energy requirements (weight 2), and universality or 
generality of the inspection principle (weight 1). The three inspection concepts were then 
ranked in each of the categories, as explained in the following paragraphs, and accordingly 
assigned the weighted scores (rank x weight). 

A Climbing-Flying Robot for Power Line Inspection 107 

The climbing robot is definitely the most difficult to design and construct, while the flying 
robot is the less so. Namely, there are a large number of commercial UAVs available on the 
market that can well serve the purpose if equipped by the appropriate sensory and 
computing equipment. The most challenging task for the flying robot is software 
development. Similar observations can be made for the climbing-flying robot but due to 
additional components and shielding requirements, this robot would be more difficult to 
design and construct. The climbing robot ranks last in this the most important category due 
to a number of reasons. First, complex grippers, drive mechanism and controller are 
required for effectively crawling on the line. Another problem is the expert system for 
obstacle detection, recognition and overcoming. Next, the whole body of the robot requires 
appropriate shielding from the powerful electromagnetic fields. 

In terms of inspection quality, the flying robot is the most problematic due lower image 
quality (vibrations), lower resolution (grater inspection distance) and limited field of view, 
especially when inspecting the conductors. The latter can be much better inspected by the 
climbing and flying-climbing robots if using line scan cameras for high-resolution inspection 
from all sides. Other power line equipment can be efficiently inspected from the conductor 
by both robots just before crossing the obstacles. However, climbing-flying robot can further 
inspect the equipment from additional angles when flying over the obstacles and this is why 
it ranks best in the inspection category. 

Autonomy at inspection, obstacle crossing and the terms of energy independence fit into 
another important category. Developing a flying robot for autonomous inspection, flying 
and avoiding obstacles is certainly more difficult than making the climbing robot 
autonomous at inspection and when climbing over the obstacles. In this respect, the 
climbing-flying robot ranks in between. In terms of energy independence, the climbing and 
climbing-flying robots can use induction system for power pick-up from the conductor, 
while the pantograph mechanism proposed for the flying robot is more dangerous, less 
reliable and more complex. 

The last evaluation category deals with the universality of the inspection concept or its 
flexibility when inspecting different power lines systems. It is very difficult if not impossible 
to design a robot that would work on all power lines without any modifications. The flying 
robot is certainly the most flexible in this respect, followed by the climbing-flying robot, 
which would need adaptations for traveling along different conductors. The less general is 
certainly the climbing robot as major modifications would be required for adaptation to 
different conductors and especially to other types of obstacles. 

Climbing- 

w 

Climbing 

flying 

Flying 

Design and construction 

4 

1|4 

2|8 

3| 12 

Inspection quality 

3 

2|6 

3 | 9 

1 1 3 

Autonomy 

2 

3 | 6 

2 | 4 

1|2 

Universality 

1 

1|1 

2 | 2 

3 | 3 

Total score 

17 

23 

20 

w = weight, rank | weighted score 
Table 1. Robot type comparison 

108 Climbing and Walking Robots 

8. Conclusion 

The most important decisive factor for choosing the robot type is certainly performance to 
price ratio. A big portion of the final price is usually the cost of development. The robot 
performance is a combination of inspection quality, autonomy and universality. We can 
conclude that the flying robot would likely have the smallest performance to price ratio 
(table I). Namely, this robot, although universal and easy to design, would offer the lowest 
inspection quality and low inspection autonomy. The development costs would certainly be 
very high for the climbing robot but the robot would be much more autonomous and could 
offer better inspection quality. The latter also holds true for the climbing-flying robot, which 
would probably not be as autonomous as the climbing robot when crossing obstacles but the 
cost of development should be much lower. 

In conclusion, the power pick-up system and automatic visual inspection are problems that 
still need to be solved efficiently for the flying robot, while automatic power line tracking 
and obstacle avoidance need further improvements to become practically feasible. The 
climbing robot also needs further developments of the power pick-up system, automatic 
visual inspection, electromagnetic shielding, robot mechanism and the control system. The 
proposed climbing-flying concept for power line inspection has not been researched yet, 
offering a number of specific challenges, such as high communication link bandwidth and 
reliable system for landing on the conductor. Nevertheless, the proposed concept seems 
feasible from the practical point of view and because good performance to price ration could 
be obtained. 

9. References 

Aggarwal, R. K., Johns, A. T., Jayasinghe, J. A. S. B. & Su, W. (2000) An overview of the 

condition monitoring of overhead lines. Electric Power Systems Research, 53, 15. 
Campoy, P., Garcia, P. J., Barrientos, A., Cerro, J. D., Aguirre, I., Roa, A., Garcia, R. & Munoz, 

J. M. (2001) An Stereoscopic Vision System Guiding an Autonomous Helicopter for 

Overhead Power Cable Inspection. Proc, Robot Vision: International Workshop RobVis 

2001, Auckland, New Zealand. 
Cooper, J., Venkatesh, S. & Kitchen, L. (1993) Early jump-out corner detectors. IEEE 

Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 15, 823. 
Fu, S., Zhang, Y., Zhao, X., Liang, Z., Hou, Z., Zou, A., Tan, M., Ye, W. & Bo, L. (2006) 

Motion Deblurring for a Power Transmission Line Inspection Robot. Computational 

Intelligence. Berlin, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg. 
Golightly, I. & Jones, D. (2003) Corner detection and matching for visual tracking during 

power line inspection. Image and Vision Computing, 21, 827. 
Golightly, I. & Jones, D. (2005) Visual control of an unmanned aerial vehicle for power line 

inspection. Proc. 12th International Conference on Advanced Robotics (ICAR '05). 
Jones, D. (2005) Power line inspection - a UAV concept. The IEE Forum on Autonomous 

Systems 2005 (Ref. No. 2005/11271). 
Jones, D., Golightly, I., Roberts, J. & Usher, K. (2006) Modeling and Control of a Robotic 

Power Line Inspection Vehicle. Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Control 

Applications (CCA '06). 
Jones, D. I. (2007) An experimental power pick-up mechanism for an electrically driven 

UAV. Proc. of IEEE International Symposium on Industrial Electronics - ISIE 2007. 

A Climbing-Flying Robot for Power Line Inspection 109 

Jones, D. I. & Earp, G. K. (1996) Requirements for aerial inspection of overhead electrical 

power lines. Proc. 12th International Conference on Remotely Piloted Vehicles. Bristol. 
Jones, D. I. & Earp, G. K. (2001) Camera sightline pointing requirements for aerial inspection 

of overhead power lines. Electric Power Systems Research, 57, 73. 
Katrasnik, J. (2007) Robotic Power Line Inspection. Faculty of Electrical Engineering. Ljubljana, 

University of Ljubljana. 
Ludan, W., Hongguang, W., Lijin, F. & Mingyang, Z. (2006) Research on Obstacle-navigation 

Control of a Mobile Robot for Inspection of the Power Transmission Lines Based on 

Expert System. Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Climbing and Walking 

Robots and the Support Technologies for Mobile Machines (CLAWAR 2005) Springer 

Berlin Heidelberg. 
Peungsungwal, S., Pungsiri, B., Chamnongthai, K. & Okuda, M. (2001) Autonomous robot 

for a power transmission line inspection. Proc. of the 2001 IEEE International 

Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS 2001). 
Sawada, J., Kusumoto, K., Maikawa, Y., Munakata, T. & Ishikawa, Y. (1991) A mobile robot 

for inspection of power transmission lines. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, 309. 
Tang, L., Wang, H. & Fang, L. (2004) Development of an inspection robot control system for 

500KV extra-high voltage power transmission lines. Proc. of SICE 2004 Annual 

Conference. 
Whitworth, C. C, Duller, A. W. G., Jones, D. I. & Earp, G. K. (2001) Aerial video inspection 

of overhead power lines. Power Engineering Journal [see also Power Engineer], 15, 25. 
Williams, M., Jones, D. I. & Earp, G. K. (2001) Obstacle avoidance during aerial inspection of 

power lines. Aircraft Engineering and Aerospace Technology, 73, 472-479. 
Xinglong, Z., Hongguang, W., Lijin, F., Mingyang, Z. & Jiping, Z. (2006) A Novel Running 

and Gripping Mechanism Design Based on Centroid Adjustment. Proc. of the 2006 

IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics and Automation. 
Zhang, Y., Fu, S., Zhao, X., Liang, Z., Tan, M. & Zhang, Y. (2006) Visual Navigation for a 

Power Transmission Line Inspection Robot. Computational Intelligence. Berlin, 

Springer Berlin / Heidelberg. 

110 Climbing and Walking Robots 

A Fuzzy Control Based 
Stair-Climbing Service Robot 

Ming-Shy an Wang 

Department of Electrical Engineering, Southern Taiwan University 

Taiwan, R.O.C. 

1. Introduction 

Recently, Taiwan and many developed countries have been experienced an emergence of 
growing aging population and decreasing working population and birth rate. The number 
of home-caring workers in need has surpassed that of available working force. Furthermore, 
the expense of home-caring elders will substantially increase. The employment of foreign 
workers is just a temporary solution. It is therefore necessary to develop a future substitute 
for the human work force. Home-caring robot is an excellent candidate capable of 
supporting such an aging society. Especially, the elders can control the robots directly to 
move up-and-down stairs for service. 

It is well-known that the most effective style of movement of a robot on a plane field is the 
wheel type. However, as obstacles and stairs exist, crawler-type and leg-type robots become 
better candidates for application. The robots of the stick type and the biped type are 
generally designed to carry elders up and down stairs. The former uses tires, rubber belts, 
and the handrail to assist the elders while walking and moving up-and-down stairs, and the 
latter uses two legs and the handrail to assist walking and moving up-and-down stairs 
(Takahashi et al., 1998). A control bar is attached to the robot waist to assist the aged person 
by stepping onto the feet of the robot. The robot "Zero Walker-1" (Konuma and Hirose, 2001) 
focused on ascending and descending stairs. An electric wheelchair named "iBOT" 
(Independence Technology, 2009), capable of ascending and descending stairs and slopes 
was released by a Japanese company. In (Sugahara, 2005), a bipedal robot was developed to 
provide only lower-limbs and a waist, named "WL-16RII", which can walk independently 
and allow users to build the upper body based on their requirements. This biped locomotor 
would be applicable as a walking wheelchair or as a walking support machine that is able to 
walk up and down stairs carrying or assisting an elder. The developed biped locomotor 
with Stewart Platform Legs successfully achieved walking up and down on stairs for 250 
mm continuously and carrying one 60-kg man on it. Additionally, the authors (Nishiwaki et 
al., 2002) successfully controlled their robot "H6" to walk up stairs for 250 mm by utilizing 
toe joints; and the robot "HRP-2" from Harada successfully climbed up 280 mm stairs by 
grasping the stair rail (Harada et al., 2002). A self-standing type eight- wheeled robot in 
(Takita et al., 2004) is able to climb up and down stairs and is supported by a mechanism 
with a planetary gear without an inner gear to eliminate the disadvantages of a wheeled 

112 Climbing and Walking Robots 

system. However, the height of climbing an obstacle generally is the same as the diameter of 
the robot's wheel. The aforementioned robots generally need tremendous effect on expense 
and time. Furthermore, it is very difficult to lift an aged person by human force and not very 
easy to have a large and heavy-weight lift machine in a normal house. 

The main difference between a fuzzy logic control (FLC) and the conventional control is that 
the former is not based on a properly defined model of the system but instead implement 
the same control "rules" that a skilled expert would operate. FLC has been applied to robot 
applications, such as mobile robots (Malima et al., 2006; Chen et al., 2004; Song & Wu, 1999), 
humanoid robots (Wang et al., 2004), and soccer robots (Wang & Tu, 2008). In the chapter, 
the FLC will steer the robot based on the outputs of DC bus current sensor and an 
inclinometer. A control board including a digital signal processor (DSP) TMS320F28335 
realizes the fuzzy rules. 

The chapter is organized in 6 sections including introduction as follows for further 
discussion. Section 2 describes the robot mechanism design and each component, the ways 
of climbing up and going down stairs, and the friction during motion. The image processing 
for the CMOS camera and FPGA and the tracking, capturing, and putting back the target 
object by the arm based on results of image processing are introduced in section 3. Section 4 
states the fundamental theory of fuzzy logic control. Section 5 presents the experimental 
results of two kinds of stair-motion and the image processing. Finally, section 6 claims the 
conclusion and future work. 

2. Stair-Climbing Robot 

The designed stair-climbing robot consists of a main body, roller chains, a front arm, and a 
rear arm. The lateral-view and vertical-view sketches of the robot by AutoCAD are shown in 
Figs. 1 and 2. The main body is equipped with two brushless DC motors (BLDCMs) and 
their drives for locomotion, worm gears for torque magnification, two DC motors to control 
two arms, and DSP-based board as control center. The chassis size of the main body is 
58.5cm x53cm and each arm is 48cm x 40cm, such that the maximum and minimum lengths 
of the moving robot will be 154.5cm and 58.5cm, respectively. There are 3 pairs of roller 
chains in the main body and two arms, respectively. Some polyurethane rubber blocks, each 
with size of 3cmx2cmxlcm, attached to the roller chains are applied for generating friction 
with ground and stairs for moving. There are 40 blocks for each arm and 56 for the main 
body. The distance between any two plastic blocks is properly arranged to fix the stair brink. 
One DC bus current sensor and one inclinometer provide the information for the robot to 
steer two motors. 

Fig. 3 shows the way of climbing up stairs based on the physical constraint. The front arm 
will be pushed down to flat top so that the main body is lifted and will be pulled up for the 
next stair-climbing. The rear arm keeps flat while the robot climbs up. Fig. 4 displays 
summary of climbing-up motion step by step. While climbing, two forces have to be 
overcome. One is the force along the inclined plane due to the robot system force of gravity, 
mg • sin 6 , and the other is the frictional force, mg • cos 6 • ju , where m is the total mass of 
the robot system, g is the gravity acceleration, 6 is the inclination angle of the stair, and ju is 
the frictional coefficient. In order to reduce the electrical specifications and volume size of 

A Fuzzy Control Based Stair-Climbing Service Robot 

113 

IDC Servo MotoFI 

Fig. 1. A lateral view of the robot 

& 

i tp i 

m 

~W~ 

m 

p=Si IS— H D^ 

Fig. 2. A vertical view of the robot 

^ s ~ — — ^ j — S 

±^ 

Ufl 

^ 

Fig. 3. Motion of climbing up 

114 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 4. Summary of climbing-up motion 

the motor, gears are considered for torque magnification. The total output torque of the 
motor, T e , has to satisfy the following inequality, 

2T e xS 1 xr/ 1 xS 2 xr/ 2 > (mg • sin 6 + mg • cos 9- ju)xl m (l) 

where l m is the operating radius, ^(^S^) and r/ l (r/ 2 )are the gear ratio and the efficiency of 

the first (second) gear, respectively. Consequently, the motor types of low rated input 
voltage and high rated speed are primary selection. 

Similarly, Fig. 5 shows the way of going down stairs and Fig. 6 displays summary of going- 
down motion step by step. During going down, the output torque from motors can be 
reduced since it is in the same direction of force of gravity of the robot system. 

Fig. 5. Motion of going down 

A Fuzzy Control Based Stair-Climbing Service Robot 

115 

Fig. 7 displays the picture of the 45-Kg stair-climbing robot with one 5-kg arm for service. Its 
operating radius is l m = 0.25m . Worm gears and the charger are then shown in Fig. 8. Since 

the batteries are prerequisite for the robot, an inbuilt charger is considered for convenience 
in charging. 

Fig. 6. Summary of going-down motion 

Fig. 7. Picture of the stair-climbing robot with its arm 

Fig. 8. Worm gear and charger 

116 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

3. Robot Arm and Image Processing 

3.1 Robot arm 

The top view of the multi-link arm is shown in Fig. 9. It consists of three couples of gears, 
three DC motors, four links, and one clamper. Referring to Fig. 9, the first DC motor steers 

the diving gear S 3 and driven gear S 4 to determine the rotating angle. Gear S 3 links S 4 
directly. Due to the limit of four stalls at corners, the span angle is within (-30 ,30 ) .The 
second motor controls the gear couples of S 5 — S 6d and S 6u — S 7 together with belts to 
stretch the length of the arm. S 6d and S 6u are mounted in the same shaft and with same 
number of gears. The lengths of the four links are / l5 / 2 ,/2 an< ^ h > respectively. 

^6d 

Fig. 9. The multi-link arm 

The pixel array of CMOS camera THDB-D5M used in the robot consists of a matrix of 2752 x 
2004 pixels addressed by column and row (Terasic, 2008). The address (column 0, row 0) 
represents the upper-right corner of the entire array. The 2592 x 1944 array in the centre 
called active region represents the default output image, surrounded by an active boundary 
region and a border of dark pixels, shown in Fig. 10. The boundary region can be used to 
avoid edge effects when achieving colour processing the result image of the active region, 
while the optically black columns and rows can be used to monitor the black level. 
Pixels of active region are output in a Bayer pattern format consisting of four // colours ,, / 
Greenl, Green2, Red, and Blue (Gl, G2, R, B) to represent three filter colours (Terasic, 2008). 
The first row output alternates between Gl and R pixels, and the second row output 
alternates between B and G2 pixels, shown in Fig. 11. The Greenl and Green2 pixels have 
the same colour filter, but they are treated as separate colours by the data path and analogue 
signal chain. 

The image raw data is sent from D5M to DE2-70 board (Terasic, 2008) where the FPGA on 
DE2-70 board will handle image processing and convert the data to RGB format to display 
on the VGA display. As a result, we first capture the image of experiment background to 
find the ranges of colours of RGB, and then define their location regions for colour 
discrimination, shown in Fig. 12. 

The target object in the experiment is a cola can with the weight of 330 g and red color 
surface. Referring to Fig. 12, the ranges of RGB intensities locate at (50, 70), (25, 30), and (23, 
28), respectively. In order to reduce the effect of light variation, the image in RGB space will 

A Fuzzy Control Based Stair-Climbing Service Robot 

117 

be converted into YC b C r space (Benkhalil et al., 1998; Hamamoto et al., 2002). In addition, 
the ranges of RGB from D5M are four times of the general image. 

Daik (50) ~T 

Itve boundary (4) F 

-J 

Dark (134) 

"-A:...-. -• '::■ '.:;■.■.: :uv :Ki 

Active Image 

2592x1944 
Pixels 

tive boundary (4). |_ 
Dark (21 .. F 

Dark (10) 

Active boundary (6)-* 

Fig. 10. Pixel array description (Terasic, 2008) 

column readout direction 

G1 

R 

G1 

R 

G1 

R 

G1 

R 

G1 

B 

G2 

B 

G2 

B 

G2 

B 

G2 

B 

G1 

R 

G1 

R 

G1 

R 

G1 

R 

G1 

B 

G2 

B 

G2 

B 

G2 

B 

G2 

B 

G1 

R 

G1 

R 

G1 

R 

G1 

R 

G1 

' 

B 

G2 

B 

G2 

B 

G2 

B 

G2 

B 

black pixels 

. First Clear 
Pixel (10,50) 

Fig. 11. Pixel Color Pattern Detail (Top Right Corner) (Terasic, 2008) 

1 frh 

■ pF gill M * mm ' 

Fig. 12. Image of experiment background 

118 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

4. Fuzzy Logic Control 

A fuzzy logic controller may be viewed as a real-time expert system since it aims to 
incorporate expert human knowledge in the control algorithm. The fuzzy logic control (FLC) 
system consists of FI (fuzzification interface), DML (decision making logic), KLB 
(knowledge base), and DFI (defuzzification interface), shown in Fig. 13. The triangle-shape 
membership functions of DC bus current I, inclination angle 6 m , and fuzzy output y are 

shown in Fig. 14, where there are seven linguistic variables, PB (positive big), PM (positive 
medium), PS (positive small), ZO (zero), NS (negative small), NM (negative medium), and 
NB (negative big) used in the chapter. 

Some of the most successful applications by fuzzy control have been highly related with 
conventional controllers, such as proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller. 
Especially, the PD-like fuzzy control is widely adopted in many applications. In the system, 
variables of DC bus current and inclination angle are fed back to determine the control 
action. The inclination angle of the stairs is fixed so that there is little variation on it during 
motion. In addition, the motion speed of the robot is too slow to need predicting the change 
of the next states of the sensor signals. As a result, for easily programming, the simplest P 
control algorithm is employed to achieve the motion control while the robot climbs up and 
goes down stairs. 
The ith fuzzy rule in the fuzzy rule-base system is described as 

R. : If x l is A n and x 2 is A i2 , then y is w i 

(2) 

where w t -,, x • , Ay , j = 1, 2 , i = 1, 2, • • • , n are fuzzy output variables, input fuzzy variables and 
linguistic variables, respectively. Referring to Fig. 15 for ith membership function with 
isosceles triangle shape, b tj means the length of the base, and a-, stands for the abscissa of 

the centre of the base. The membership grade of input x , is calculated by 

2-lx. -a H I 

(3) 

The bases of triangular membership function keep same for easily programming. By 
product operation, the membership grade of the antecedent proposition is calculated as 

Mi =4i0i)- 4-2 2 ) 

(4) 

Then the output will be 

y = 

r n \ If n \ 

Vi=l J I \i=\ J 

(5) 

Summarily, Table 1 lists the linguistic control rules. 

A Fuzzy Control Based Stair-Climbing Service Robot 

119 

Knowledge 
base 

Commands 

Fuzzification 
interface 

Decision 

making 

logic 

Defuzzification 
interface 

Quantification 

Current 
sensor 

ADC 

/ 

Fig. 13. Block diagram of fuzzy logic control system 

Current 
sensor-/ 

Inclinometer 

m 

Control 
output-^ 

A 

NB 

ynm\ 

\ NS ) 

\ zo / 

/ps 

/pmV 

PB 

-5 

NB 

Xnm) 

\ NS ) 

\ zo / 

(PS 

XpmX 

5 " 

PB 

-45° 

NB 

Ynm\ 

\ NS ) 

0° 

\ zo ) 

(ps 

XpmY 

45° 

PB 

-5 5 

Fig. 14. Membership functions of current sensor, inclinometer, and fuzzy control output 

> X; 

Fig. 15. ith membership function with isosceles triangle shape 

5. Experimental Results 

The specifications of the stair-climbing robot are as following. The gear ratio and the 
efficiency of the first (second) gear are S x = 66(S 2 = 20) and r\ x — 0.7(r/ 2 = 0.55) , 

respectively. The static frictional coefficient of polyurethane rubber blocks is about 0.6. Fig. 
16 presents the characteristic curve of an inclinometer in the system. The output voltage 
depending on the voltage source is almost linear with the inclination angle. The rated 

120 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

specifications of BLDCM are: 200 W, 24 V, 9600 rpm, and T e = 0.1336 Nm . Since the 

waveforms of back electromagnetic forces (EMFs) and the armature currents of a BLDCM 
are trapezoidal alike, not perfectly sinusoidal, the six-step driving algorithm rather than the 
vector control is adopted on speed control. The popular PI control is adopted for speed 
regulation. 

ZO 

PS 

PM 

PB 

NB 

ZO 

PS 

PM 

PB 

NM 

ZO 

PM 

PM 

PM 

NS 

ZO 

PB 

PS 

ZO 

ZO 

ZO 

PB 

PS 

ZO 

PS 

ZO 

PB 

PS 

ZO 

PM 

ZO 

PS 

PM 

PM 

PB 

ZO 

PS 

PM 

PB 

Table 1. Linguistic control rule table 

-45° 0° 

Fig. 16. Characteristic curve of an inclinometer 

A preliminary experiment that the unloaded robot climbs up and goes down a gradual stair 

with the rise of 120 mm and depth of 400 mm (0 = 16.7 ) by wired control is proceeded. It is 
firstly easy to check the validness of (1). The results of every motion in Figs. 3 and 5 are 
shown in Figs. 17 and 18, respectively (Wang & Tu, 2008). It qualifies the designed robot. 
Then we conduct the second experiment that the robot with loading of one arm moves up 

and down a steeper stair with the rise of 175 mm and depth of 280 mm ( = 32 ) by FLC 

A Fuzzy Control Based Stair-Climbing Service Robot 

121 

and (1) still holds. The taped pictures of the experiment and every motion in Figs. 3 and 5 
are shown in Figs.19 and 20, respectively. Even lack of any gyroscope, there is little variation 
in proceeding direction happened during motion due to high friction force between rubber 
blocks and stairs. The designed robot performs very well during the trip even there are 
damaged parts on the up-and-down way. The FLC prevents the robot abruptly going down 
to the ground and damaging itself. 

The third experiment contains image processing and arm motion. In order to prevent target 
damage while clamping, one pressure sensor is installed inside the clamper. The pressure 
output after calibrating is sent to DSP for reference. Fig. 21 displays the sequentially taped 
pictures from videos of capturing the cola can and putting it back by the robot arm (Tu, 
2009). As the can shifting left or right, the arm can correctly track to the corresponding 
direction. 

jfeb- 

Fig. 17. Realized motion of climbing up by wired control 

122 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

(e) (f) 

Fig. 18. Realized motion of going down by wired control 

6. Conclusion and Future Work 

In the chapter, we have developed a stair-climbing robot to provide service for the elders 
and completed two walking experiments of moving up and down stairs with the rise/ depth 
of 120/400 mm and 175/280 mm. The third experiment of object tracking, capturing, and 
loading by the arm have been shown in the taped pictures from videos to verify the 
proposed design. In fact, we will show the arm may capture the specific object during 
climbing up and down in the future. In addition, the robot will patrol for security by the 
CCD camera around the house while more image processing functions are provided. 

A Fuzzy Control Based Stair-Climbing Service Robot 

123 

^E ■ - 

Fig. 19. Realized motion of climbing up 

124 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 20. Realized motion of going down 

A Fuzzy Control Based Stair-Climbing Service Robot 

125 

(S) (h) 

Fig. 21. The taped pictures of the experimental results of image processing and arm motion 

126 Climbing and Walking Robots 

7. References 

Benkhalil, A. K.; Sipson, S. S. & Booth, W. (1998). Real-time detection and tracking of a 

moving object using a complex programmable logic device, Proc. oflEE Colloquium 

on Target Tracking and Data Fusion, pp. 10/1-10/7, Birmingham, UK, 9 Jun. 
Chen, P.-B.; Huang, C.-M. & Fu, L.-C. (2004). A robust visual servo system for tracking an 

arbitrary-shaped object by a new active contour method, Proceedings of the 2004 

American Control Conference, Vol. 2, pp. 1516-1521, Taipei, Sep. 2-4. 
Hamamoto, T.; Nagao, S. & Aizawa, K. (2002). Real-time objects tracking by using-smart 

image sensor and FPGA, Proc. of 2002 International Conference on Image Processing, 

Rochester, Vol. 3, pp .441-444, New York, USA, 22-25 Sept. 
Harada, K.; et al. (2004). Dynamical balance of a humanoid robot grasping an environment, 

Proc. of 2004 IEEE/RS] Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Vo. 2, pp. 1167- 

1173, 28 Sept.-2 Oct. 
Independence Technology website, http://www.ibotnow.com/ibot/index.html. 
Konuma, Y. & Hirose, S. (2001). Development of the stair-climbing biped robot 'Zero 

Walker-r, Proc. of the 19th Annual Conf. of the RS], pp. 851-852 
Malima, A.; Ozgur, E. & Cetin, M. (2006). A fast algorithm for vision-based hand gesture 

recognition for robot control, Proc. of IEEE 14th Signal Processing and Communications 

Applications, pp. 1-4, Antalya, 17-19 April. 
Nishiwaki, K.; et al. (2002). Toe joints that enhance bipedal and fullbody motion of 

humanoid robots, Proc. of the IEEE ICRA 2002, Vol. 3, pp. 3105-3110, Washington, 

DC, USA, 11-15 May. 
Park, S. B. (1998). A Motion Detection System Based On A CMOS Photo Sensor Array," Proc. 

of IEEE Conference on Image Processing, Vol. 3, pp. 967 -971, Chicago, USA, 4-7 Oct. 
Song, K. T., & Wu, T. Z. (1999). Visual Servo Control of a Mobile Manipulator Using One- 
dimensional Windows, " Proceedings of IEEE IECON l 99, pp. 547-552. 
Sugahara, Y.; Ohta, A.; Hashimoto, K.; Sunazuka, H.; Kawase, M.; Tanaka, C; Lim, H.-O. & 

Takanishi, A. (2005). Walking up and down stairs carrying a human by a biped 

locomotor with parallel mechanism, Proc. of 2005 IEEE/RS] International Conf. on 

Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp.1489-1494, 2-6 Aug. 
Takahashi, Y.; Nagasawa, T.; Nakayama, H.; Hanzawa, T.; Arai, Y.; Nagashima, T.; Hirata, 

E.; Nakamura, M.; Iizuka, T. & Ninomiya, H. (1998). Robotic assistance for aged 

people, Proc. of the 37th SICE Annual Conf, pp. 853-858, Japan, 29-31 July 
Takita, Y.; Shimoi, N. & Date, H. (2004). Development of a wheeled mobile robot "octal 

wheel" realized climbing up and down stairs, Proc. of 2004 IEEE/RS] International 

Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Vol. 3, pp. 2440-2445, 28 Sept.-2 Oct. 
Terasic company, (2008). THDB-D5M Hardware Specification and User Guide. 
Tu, Y.-M. (2009). Design and Implementation of a Stair-Climbing Robot, Master Thesis, 

Department of Electrical Engineering, Southern Taiwan University, Taiwan. 
Wang, C.-K.; Cheng, M.-Y.; Liao, C.-H.; Li, C.-C; Sun, C.-Y. & Tsai, M.-C. (2004). Design and 

implementation of a multi-purpose real-time pan-tilt visual tracking system, 

Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE International Conference on Control Applications, pp. 1079- 

1084, Taipei, Sep. 2-4. 
Wang M.-S. & Tu, Y.-M. (2008). Design and implementation of a stair-climbing robot," Proc. 

of 2008 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Robotics and Its Social Impacts 

(ARSO 2008), Taipei, Taiwan. 

8 

Evolutionary Multi-Objective Optimization 
for Biped Walking of Humanoid Robot 

Toshihiko Yanase and Hitoshi Iba 

The University of Tokyo 
Japan 

1. Introduction 

The recent remarkable progress of robotics research makes advanced skills for robots to 
solve complex tasks. The divide-and-conquer approach is an intuitive and efficient method 
when we encounter complex problems. Being a divide-and-conquer approach, the multi- 
layered system decomposes the problem into a set of levels and each level implements a 
single task-achieving behaviour. Many researchers employ this approach for robot control 
system, dividing a complex behaviour into several simple behaviours. For example, Lie et al. 
developed the Evolutionary Subsumption Architecture, which enables for heterogeneous 
robots to acquire the cooperative object transferring task (Liu & Iba, 2003). 
The autonomous locomotion of humanoid robots consists of following modules: global path 
planning using given geometrical information, local path planning based on the observation 
of environment, footstep planning, and whole-body motion generator. Since these modules 
mainly exchange the information with their neighbours, we can observe that they are 
hierarchically arranged from the aspect of communication. The parameter settings among 
these modules are necessary to adapt the system to the targeting environment. The problem 
involves a number of conflicting objectives such as stability of the robot motion and speed of 
locomotion. 

In this paper, we present a parameter tuning method for multi-layered robot control system 
by means of Evolutionary Multi-Objective Optimization (EMO). We explore the set of 
parameters for modules to adapt various kinds of environments. Switching these parameter 
sets enables us to operate the robots effectively. We developed three modules as the 
experiment environment: walking pattern generator, footstep planner and path planner. In 
the experiment, we focused on the footstep planner shown in Fig. 1, which realizes collision- 
free walking. The parameter setting was manually adjusted in previous researches (Kuffner 
et al., 2003; Chestnutt et al., 2005). We discuss the conflicting objectives for the optimization 
footstep planner, and introduce a parameter setting method using EMO. Then we propose a 
simple rule to use parameter sets obtained by EMO to adapt the footstep planner to both 
crowded and sparse fields. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes our robot control system, 
Section 3 shows an experiment of the parameter setting of the footstep planner, and Section 
4 shows an application using the parameter setting obtained from Section 3 and a 

128 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

comparison with a conventional approach. Section 5 provides the discussion of these 
experiments, and finally Section 6 concludes with summary and future works. 

(a) 

Goal 
Obstacle 

(b) 

Fig. 1. Example of Footstep Planning for the humanoid HOAP-1 

2. Multi-layered Robot Control System 

2.1 System Overview 

We implemented a locomotion control system which is able to find an optimal sequence of 
footsteps from a start location to a goal position without colliding with obstacles. The 
system consists of three modules, path planner, footstep planner and whole-body motion 
generator. The path planner generates the geometrical path for the given environmental 
map. Then footstep planner calculates a sequence of footsteps based on the path 
information. The whole-body motion generator calculates the trajectories of joint angles 
which realize the given sequence of footstep without losing the stability of the robot motion. 
By using these modules cooperatively, the locomotion planning is executed as follows: 

1. 

3. 
4. 

Plan the entire path from the start position to the goal position by using RRT. (Fig. 2 

Place the sub-goals for footstep planner based on the length of path at regular 

intervals. (Fig. 2 (b)) 

Plan the sequence of footsteps to the sub-goals. (Fig. 2 (c)) 

Repeat Step 3 until the robot reaches the goal position. 

In our research, we have used the HOAP-1 (Humanoid for Open Architecture Platform) 
robot manufactured by Fujitsu Automation. We adjusted the constraints of walking, such as 
the limitation of landing position and joint angles for HOAP-1. Motions were controlled by 
specifying the joint angles of the 20 joints of the entire body every 0.002 seconds. The 
characteristics of the HOAP-1 are noted below: (1) Height: 483 [mm], Weight: 5.9 [kg]. (2) 
The internal interface between the hardware and software is available for public use. (3) For 

Evolutionary Multi-Objective Optimization for Biped Walking of Humanoid Robot 

129 

movable parts, each leg had six degrees of freedom and each arm had four degrees of 
freedom, for a total of 20 degrees of freedom on the left and right sides. 

(a) (b) (c) 

Fig. 2. (a) Path from the initial position to the goal position planned by RRT algorithm, (b) 
Sub-goals placed on the path, (c) Footstep sequence generated by A* Search algorithm. 

2.2 Path Planning 

We implemented the path planning module based on the Rapidly-exploring Random Tree 
(RRT) algorithm (Kuffner et al., 2000). RRT algorithm is a probabilistic motion planner 
which has found widespread use in the field of robot motion planning (Kamio & Iba, 2006; 
Zucker et al., 2007). Because RRT offers almost no hypothesis in terms of the problem, we 
could easily apply it to various problems. In this study, the state of the robot was expressed 
using 2D information (x coordinate, y coordinate), and we did not deal in another kind of 
information such as the rotation angle around z axis and the velocity of the robot to simplify 
the problem. We have to examine the collision of robots and obstacles when we use the path 
planning. In this experiment, the robot was approximated by the circle whose radius is 20 
[cm] in order to detect the conflict between obstacles and the robot. 

Before generating a sequence of footsteps which satisfies the planned path, we place the 
sub-goal for footstep planner. The sub-goal is decided by the given path length because the 
computational cost for the footstep planning increases with the number of footsteps. 

2.3 Footstep Planning 

A footstep planner returns an optimal sequence of footstep locations according to the 
plausible sets of footstep locations defined as shown in Fig. 3. In this research, we employed 
a footstep planner based on the A* Search Algorithm (Kuffner et al., 2003; Chestnutt et al., 
2005). This footstep planner is fast enough to be used for the real environment. This is 
because the planner descritize the footstep location and explores footstep sequences in order 
of the estimated cost. Next, we explain the setup of A* Search in this research. 

130 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Backwon 

^ 

5Jd£-/^v/Forward 

Fig. 3. Example of footsteps of the humanoid HOAP-1 

2.3.1 Finite Set of Actions 

The A* Search Algorithm uses a finite set of actions for exploration. In case of footstep 
planning, we define an action as the candidate footstep at the next time step, hence the 
candidate footstep should be descritized in advance. Fig. 3 shows an example of a set of 
footsteps which is descritezed into four candidates. The candidate footsteps are placed 
symmetrically when the robot switch the supporting legs. 

2.3.2 Environmental Map 

We used two kinds of maps as the experimental environment. At first, we employed a grid 
map in the experiment of Section 3. Each grid is uniformly-shaped and has information 
about the existence of obstacles. The other one is the vector map. Obstacles and walls are 
represented by rectangles in the vector map which is used in Section 4. The collision 
between footprints and obstacles is detected in both these maps. 

2.3.3 Estimation of Cost 

The A* Search Algorithm calculates the cost of the entire path by using the cost function and 
the heuristic estimation. The cost function is the length of footstep sequence from the initial 
position to the current position. The heuristic estimation calculates the minimum length of 
the footstep sequence from the current position to the goal position by dividing the distance 
by the maximum step length. 

2.3.4 Termination Criteria 

The search is terminated when the footstep sequence reaches the goal position. The search 
can fail in one of two ways: 

• The number of A* search tries exceeded the maximum allowable. In this experiment 
we limited the maximum number to 3000. 

• No more valid successor nodes can be generated. In this case, no collision-free footstep 
sequence exists using the given discrete set of footstep locations. 

Evolutionary Multi-Objective Optimization for Biped Walking of Humanoid Robot 131 

2.4 Whole-body Motion Generator 

Up to now, many biped robots are successfully developed with the Zero Moment Point 
(ZMP) concept (Zhu et al, 2004; Nishiwaki et al, 2002; Nishiwaki & Kagami, 2006). In this 
experiment, one of the ZMP based method, a Fast Generation Method of Motion Pattern that 
Follows Desired ZMP (Nishiwaki et al, 2002) proposed by Nishiwaki et al. was used as a 
whole-body motion generator. The features of this method are as follows: (1) realizing the 
expected feet position accurately and (2) fast enough to used as a real-time module. Since 
real robots have many performance constraints, the gap between the simulated and real 
robot becomes a problem. Following performance constraints are taken into consideration in 
this paper; (1) Existence of the solution for inverse-kinematics of legs, (2) Limitation of joint 
angle range, (3) Collision between links. We examined the locations of feasible states by 
using the simulated model of HOAP-1, and stored in the regular grid. The footstep planner 
uses the regular grid as a reference to detect infeasible footstep locations. 

2.5 Problems of Current Biped Walking Control System 

The A* Search Algorithm is used for exploring a graph as shown in Fig. 4, which represents 
the footstep transitions. The node S means the initial state, and each node represents the 
footstep locations. The red node means the goal state. The gray node means an infeasible 
footstep which can not be applied at the time step. The number in the footstep location 
shows the kind of footstep. 

Fig. 4 (a) shows a search with the footstep sequence with footstep set {1, 2, 3}, and failed to 
reach to the goal state. There are two kinds of counter measures. One is to replace the set of 
footsteps with {1, 4, 5} as shown in (b), and the other one is to add the footstep {4, 5} as 
shown in (c). As can be seen from Fig. 4 (b) and (c), both methods successfully reach to the 
goal state, however, (c) requires more nodes than (b). In the Fig. 4 (a) and (b), three kinds of 
candidate footsteps are used for the footstep planning, so that the possible search space is a 
full 3-ary tree. On the other hand, the possible search space of Fig. 4 (c) is full 5-ary tree. The 
depth of the graph means number of footsteps. The spread of graph changes depending on 
the number of candidate footsteps. The maximum number of node in the search tree is 
represented as follow: 

1 - k n 

N^=——, (1) 

\-k 

where k is the number of candidate footsteps and n is the length of the footstep sequence. 
The search space grows significantly as the increase of candidates. For example, in case of n 
= 10 and k = 3, the maximum number of node is 29524. In case of n = 10 and k = 5, the 
maximum number of node is 2441406. We have to reduce the number of candidate footstep 
in order to calculate long footstep sequences with the same amount of search time. In this 
research, we propose a switching method of footstep sets in order to curb the growth of 
search space. 

We can also observe the side-effect of discretized footstep locations. If we employ only short 
footsteps, the robot is able to pass through narrow paths. However, such kind of set of 
footsteps usually requires much computational resources for the footstep planner because 
short step increases the total steps. On the other hand, the set of landing positions which has 
only long footsteps reduces the total steps and it increases the feasible path width. In this 

132 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

research, we focused on two requirements, to reduce the computational resources and to 
minimize the feasible path width. 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 
Fig. 4. Search space of A* Search Algorithm. Each node represents a state, which is a footstep 
location. Gray nodes mean infeasible states. The red nodes mean goal states. 

3. Multi-Objective Optimization of Footstep Planner 

3.1 Evolutionary Multi-Objective Optimization 

The multi-objective optimization problem has multiple criteria to be minimized or 
maximized. To solve this problem we need to explore a set of solutions called Pareto optima. 
Evolutionary Multi-Objective Optimization which is one of the methods to solve the multi- 
objective optimization problem is rapidly developed by many researchers. Representative 
methods are as follows: Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm (MOGA) (Fonseca & Fleming, 
1993), Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA-II) (Deb et al, 2002), and 
Strength Pareto Evolutionary Algorithm 2 (SPEA2) (Zitzler et al., 2001). These methods are 
widely used in various kinds of research fields (Coello Coello, C. & Lamont, 2004). 

3.2 Experimental Setup 

We used NSGA-II which is an elitism EMO algorithm for optimization of the discrete set of 
landing locations. NSGA-II employs the mechanizm to penalize the crowded solutions in 

Evolutionary Multi-Objective Optimization for Biped Walking of Humanoid Robot 

133 

order to keep the diversity of solutions. NSGA-II was widely applied for various Real- 
World Applications (Deb et aL, 2002). In this experiment, a chromosome was composed of 
two real variables. Each variable corresponds to the length of the footstep, forward- 
backward and sideward. 

■ 

1 . 

■ 

1* 

1 

art 

■ 

■ 

fes 

(a) 

m 

(c) (d) 

Fig. 5. Environmental maps for optimization, (a) Environment A to evaluate average 
numbers of A* search tries (b) Environment B to evaluate minimum feasible width of path, 
(c) and (d) show typical results of footstep planning. 

As we mentioned in Section 2, two conflicting objectives exist. The criteria of this 
optimization were as follows: 

• Average numbers of A* search tries 

• Minimum feasible width of path 

In order to evaluate these two objective functions, we created two environments: 
Environment A (Fig. 5 left, 220cm x220cm), Environment B (Fig. 5 right, 220cm x220cm). 
With Environment A, we measured average numbers of A* search tries to evaluate the 

134 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

computational cost. We placed the obstacles in Environment A randomly. The start position 
was settled in the center of the map and the goals were settled in each free space. The 
footstep planning was carried out from left-top to right-bottom respectively. After 
evaluating all the free space, we averaged the numbers of A* search tries. With Environment 
B, we evaluated the second objective. The task is to reach the goal located in the middle of 
the narrow path. We simply explored the minimum width by using hill-climbing method. 

The parameters of NSGA-II are listed in Table 1. The population number was set to 100. The 
number of generation was set to 70. We employed real-valued mutation based on the 
uniform distribution as the mutation operator, and the Unimodal Normal Distribution 
Crossover (UNDX) (Ono et al., 2003) as the crossover operator. The Two parameters of 
UNDX were determined according to the recommended values in the literature (Ono et al., 
2003 ; Ono & Kobayashi, 1997). The crossover rate was 0.9, and mutation rate was 0.01. We 
assumed that all landing positions in the candidates can transfer to each other because we 
set the step cycle slow enough to satisfy the constraints. 

Parameter Name 

Value 

Population Size 

100 

Maximum Generation 

70 

Crossover 

Rate 

0.9 

Method 

UNDX 

8\ 

0.25 

s\ 

0.06125 

Mutation 

Rate 

0.01 

Method 

uniform mutation 

Table 1. Parameter setup of NSGA-II 

3.3 Results 

At 70th generation we observed that most of the individuals became non-dominated 
solutions. We also applied 10000 times Random Search as a comparison. The nondominated 
solutions acquired by NSGA-II and Random Search in the typical run were plotted in Fig. 6. 
The vertical axis means the minimum feasible width of path [mm], and the horizontal axis 
means the average number of A* search tries. From the Fig. 6, we can observe the trade-off 
relationship between the two objectives. Both of the method successfully obtained the Pareto 
solutions, however we can observed the diversity of NSGA-II population is superior to the 
one of Random Search population. 

We used the Ratio of Non-dominated Individuals (RNI) to compare the performance of the 
two populations. RNI is used for the comparison of two sets of non-dominated individuals 
Si and S2. At first, the united set of non-dominated individuals S u is created by combining Si 
and S2. Then, RNI is calculated by the ratio of Si or S2 among S u . We say that one set of 
solutions is closer to the true Pareto-solutions if its RNI is greater than that of the other one. 
The RNI of NSGA-II was 63% and the RNI of Random Search was 37%. NSGA-II saved the 
number of evaluations by 30%, and successfully obtained better solutions. 

Evolutionary Multi-Objective Optimization for Biped Walking of Humanoid Robot 

135 

0.205 

0.2 

0.195 

¥ 0.19 

JZ 

"5 

^ 0.185 
o 

I 0.18 

=55 0.175 
nj 

0) 

LL 

E 0.17 

=> 
E 

j 0.165 

0.16 

0.155 

0.15 

200 400 600 800 1000 1200 

Average Number of A* Search Tries 

Fig. 6. Pareto-front of NSGA-II and Random Search 

1 

1 1 1 1 1 1 1 

NSGA-II + 

Random Search x 

% 

" 

+ 

++ 

- 

■Mr 

* 

*► 

3 

K* 

\ 

-W 

_ 

**> 

x *x 

*% 

^% 

- 

- 

+ ^ + _ 

++ 
i i i i i i i 

4. Switching the Parameter of Footstep Planner 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

In order to examine the performance of the acquired sets of landing position, we conducted 
another experiment. The validation environments are shown in Fig. 7. There are four rooms 
(2[m] x2[m]) connected by the corridor (4[m]x0.5[m]). The rectangle obstacles (0.15[m] x 
0.04[m]) were randomly placed in the environments. We fixed the start position at the right- 
bottom room and the goal position at the left-top room. The red circles represent the 
positions of the goals for the successful trials or the sub-goal where the planner failed. After 
generating the entire path from the initial position to the goal position by using the path 
planner, we added small obstacles (0.04[m] x0.04[m]). These small obstacles ignored by the 
path planner should be avoided by the footstep planner. 

4.2 Switching Rule 

In order to reduce the number of footsteps, we switched the sets of landing positions. We 
used two extreme sets of landing positions, which located at both edges of the Pareto front, 
the set with the smallest average number of A* search tries (Set A) and the set with the 
smallest minimum feasible width of path (Set B). The Set A was used to reduce the total 
footsteps, and the Set B redeemed the failures of the plans with Set A. In this experiment, we 
employed a simple rule to switch the sets of landing positions as follows: 

1. Execute the footstep planning by using the Set A. 

2. If the planner fails to create the footsteps in step 1, apply the Set B. Otherwise, go to 
step 1. 

3. If the sequence of footsteps is successfully calculated, go to step 1. Otherwise, the plan 
fails. 

136 Climbing and Walking Robots 

4.3 Results 

We compared the proposed method to the conventional method which explored the 
footsteps with a single fixed footstep set, the Set A or the Set B. The performance was 
evaluated by the total number of footsteps. Fig. 7 shows the experimental environments and 
a typical result of the path planning and the footstep planning, (a) -(c) in Fig. 7 shows the 
Environment C. (d)-(e) in Fig. 7 shows the Environment D. The difference between 
Environment C and D is the placement of the small obstacles. (a)(d) shows the footsteps 
planned with Set A. (b)(e) shows the footsteps planned with Set B. (c)(f) shows the footsteps 
planned by the proposed method. The proposed method generated the short sequences of 
footsteps and the sequence which was able for the robot to pass through the narrow space. 
On the other hand, the planner with Set A failed at the middle of the map where the small 
obstacles and the wall formed a narrow path as shown in (a). The planner with Set B 
successfully passed through the narrow path, however it generated much longer sequences 
of footstep than the proposed method. The total number of footsteps, averaged over 5 runs 
are presented in Table 2. The total number of footsteps of the proposed method was about 
72.2 % less than that of planner with Set B. 

Planner with Set A 

Planner with Set B 

Proposed method 

Environment C 

- 

1548 

454 

Environment D 

398 

1509 

396 

Table 2. Total number of footsteps 

5. Discussion 

5.1 Multi-Objective Optimization of Footstep Planner 

As we discussed in section 2, we can observe the trade-off relationship between two 
performance measures of footstep planner, the computational cost and minimum feasible 
width of path. In the previous section, we successfully acquired the discrete sets of landing 
positions for the footstep planner. By using NSGA-II, we saved the number of evaluations 
by 30%, and successfully obtained better solutions compared to the Random Search. 
The trade-off relationship in this experiment is caused by the grain size of descritization of 
search space, hence this kind of multi-objective problem can be also observed in other 
problems when we handle the continuous problems by the discrete algorithm. 

5.2 Parameter Switching of Footstep Planner 

We also introduced a simple rule to switch the sets of landing positions. Using the proposed 
method, we obtained the 72.2 % shorter sequences of footsteps than that generated by the 
planner with Set B. We also generated the sequence which was able for the robot to pass 
through the narrow space where the planner with Set A failed. 

Our proposed switching method with two sets of candidates worked efficiently in the 
environment where only one narrow path exists in the sparse field. In case of the path 
whose width gradually changes, however, switching more sets of candidates will be more 
effective than the current method. We can simply change the switching rules and choose 
appropriate sets of candidate from many of them because we have explored Pareto-optimal 
solutions in advance. 

Evolutionary Multi-Objective Optimization for Biped Walking of Humanoid Robot 

137 

Environment C 

Environment D 

Goal 

n 

Sub-goal 
Starts 

'/>•. 

\i- ■ 

(a) 

I s ? 

i 

-ifulynj^^'^iJ 

ft > • . 

(b) 

m 

i 

wmffffSJtmmT 

fh 

\ . 

(c) 

''1 

: / 

^^^Jg ♦ . 

•/> 

CD 

CD 
Q_ 

CO 

CD 

(d) 

5 

: / 

XffifUlJ ^JjLWMn ^ . 

v 7 

(e) 

g 

: / 

™^^m^ ^ # 

y>* 

* 

(f) 

CD 

CD 
Q_ 

CO 

CD 

CD 

"0_ 
Q) 

CD 
Q. 

< 

CD 

■a 

-^ 
o 
■a 
o 
in 

CD 

o_ 

3 

CD 
^ 
O 
Q_ 

Fig. 7. Environment for validation: (a)(b)(c) show Environment C and typical results. 
(d)(e)(f) show Environment D and typical results, (a) failed to plan the footstep sequence at 
the narrow part of the path, (c) changed the set of footsteps at the narrow part of the path. 

138 Climbing and Walking Robots 

6. Conclusion and Future Works 

We have presented a parameter setting method for a biped walking controller. At first, we 
introduced the robot control system and discussed the trade-off relationship of parameter 
settings for the footstep planning module. Next, we applied NSGA-II to acquire a set of 
parameters for the footstep planner. Then we proposed a simple rule to switch the sets of 
parameters to obtain the short sequence of footsteps. We also confirmed the proposed 
method generated the footsteps which was able for the robot to pass through the narrow 
space. 

Our current work focuses on the translation of landing position without taking into 
consideration the rotation. We plan to optimize both parameters simultaneously to improve 
the performances of the footstep planner. Also, we intend to conduct experiments applying 
this system to the humanoid robot in a real environment. 

7. References 

Chestnutt, J.; Lau, M.; Cheung, G.; Kuffner, J.; Hodgins, J. & Takeo Kanade. (2005). Footstep 

Planning for the Honda ASIMO Humanoid, Proceedings of the IEEE International 

Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 629-634, April, 2005. 
Coello Coello, C. & Lamont G. (2004). An Introduction to Multi-Objective Evolutionary 

Algorithms and Their Applications, In: Application of Multi-Objective Evolutionary 

Aogorithms, Advances in Natural Computation, Vol . 1, pp. 1-28, 2004. 
Deb, K.; Pratab, A.; Agrawal, S. & Meyarivan, T. (2002). A fast and elitist multiobjective 

genetic algorithm: Nsga-II, IEEE Transaction on Evolutionary Computation, Vol. 6, No. 

2, pp. 182-197, 2002. 
Fonseca, C. M. & Fleming, P. J. (1993). Genetic Algorithms for Multiobjective Optimization: 

Formulation, Discussion and Generalization. Proceedings of the Fifth International 

Conference on Genetic Algorithms, pp 416-423, Morgan Kaufmann, 1993 
Kuffner, J. Jr. & LaVall, S. M. (2000). RRT-connect: An efficient approach to single-query 

path planning, Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 

Automation (ICRA '00), 2000. 
Kamio, S. & Iba, H. (2006). Cooperative object transport with humanoid robots using rrt 

path planning and re-planning, Proceedings of the 2006 IEEE/RSJ International 

Conference on Intelligent Robotics and Systems (IROS2006), 2006. 
Kuffner, J; Kagami, S.; Nishiwaki, K.; Inaba, M. & Inoue. H. (2003). Online footstep planning 

for humanoid robots. Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 

Automation 2003, pp. 932-937, 2003. 
Liu, H. & Iba, H. (2003). Multi-agent learning of heterogeneous robots by evolutionary 

subsumption. Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference 

(GECCO2003), pp. 1715-1728, 2003. 
Nishiwaki, K.; Kagami, S.; Kuniyoshi, Y.; Inaba, M. & Inoue, H. (2002). Online generation of 

humanoid walking motion based on a fast generation method of motion pattern 

that follows desired zmp. Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE/RSJ Intl. Conference on 

Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 2684-2689, 2002. 
Nishiwaki, K. & Kagami, S. (2006). High frequency walking pattern generation based on 

preview control of zmp. Proceedings of the 2006 IEEE International Conference on 

Robotics and Automation, pp. 2667-2672, 2006. 

Evolutionary Multi-Objective Optimization for Biped Walking of Humanoid Robot 139 

Ono, I. & Kobayashi, S. (1997). A Real-coded Genetic Algorithm for Function Optimization 
Using Unimodal Normal Distribution Crossover. Proceedings of 7th Intl. Conference 
on Genetic Algorithm, pp. 246-253, 1997. 

Ono, I.; Kita, H. & Kobayashi, S. (2003). A Real-coded Genetic Algorithm using the 
Unimodal Normal Distribution Crossover. In: Natural Computing Series archive 
Advances in Evolutionary Computing: theory and applications, pp. 213-237, 2003. 

Zhu, C; Tomizawa, Y.; Luo, X. & Kawamura, A. (2004). Biped walking with variable zmp, 
frictional constraint, and inverted pendulum model. Proceedings of IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics 2004. (ROBIO 2004), pp. 425-430, 
2004. 

Zitzler, E.; Laumanns, M. & Thiele, L. (2001). Spea2: Improving the performance of the 
strengthpareto evolutionary algorithm. Technical Report 103, Computer Engineering 
and Commu-nication Networks Lab (TIK), Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) 
Zurich, 2001. 

Zucker, M.; Kuffner, J. & Branicky, M. (2007). Multipartite rrts for rapid replanning in 
dynamic environments. Proceedings of IEEE Int. Conference of Robotics and 
Automation, 2007. 

140 Climbing and Walking Robots 

On Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendons 
in Bipedal Walking Energetics 

Reza Ghorbani and Qiong Wu 

University of Hawaii at Manoa, University of Manitoba 

USA, Canada 

1. Introduction 

Inspired by locomotion in nature, researchers have developed the passive dynamic walking 
machine principle and applied it to the legged robotics (Coleman & Ruina, 1998; Collins et al., 
2001; Garcia, 1999; McGeer, 1990; Wisse, 2004; Wisse & Frankenhuyzen, 2006). The passive 
dynamic walking machines provide human-like locomotion in legged robots that is more ef- 
ficient than the precisely joint-angle-controlled robots. On the other hand, tuning the param- 
eters of the passive dynamic walking robots are tricky, time consuming and requires much 
experimentation. In addition, passive dynamic walking robots still have considerable energy 
loss through rapid changes in the velocity direction of the center of mass of the robot during 
collision of the foot with the ground. Precisely joint-angle-controlled bipedal walking robots 
also undergo significant energy loss caused by rigid collision of the foot with the ground in 
addition to their common energy dissipation in robot's power systems. 

Collision of the foot with the ground during bipedal walking is inevitable which is one of the 
major sources of the energy loss. Establishing a new technique to reduce this energy loss is a 
challenging problem which we desire to address in this work by developing the idea of using 
the adjustable stiffness elastic elements in robot's structure. We believe that the adjustment 
of the elasticity as a control strategy can significantly improve the energetics of locomotion in 
bipedal walking robots by reducing the energy loss during the collision phase, which starts 
with an impact of the heel-strike followed by continuous motion and ends by a second impact 
at the foot-touch-down. This work , as a first step in this research area, constructively demon- 
strates the idea through two main efforts. The first effort is to develop the conceptual designs 
of the adjustable stiffness artificial tendons (ASAT) to show that the idea can be implemented 
in practice. The second effort is to study the effects of adjustable stiffness elasticity on reduc- 
ing the energy loss by adding the model of each ASAT into the robot dynamics. 
This introductory section reviews the research on legged locomotion which indicates the im- 
portance of elasticity in mechanics of locomotion in nature. In human walking, part of the 
kinetic and potential energy from the body is transiently stored as elastic strain energy during 
the collision phase and is released later during the rebound phase by elastic recoil (Kuo et al., 
2005). This phenomenon greatly reduces the work required from the muscles and lowers the 
metabolic cost of locomotion (Alexander & Bennett, 1989; Cavagna et al., 1977). The mechan- 
ics of elastic recoil were also studied for running and it was found that, the forward kinetic 
energy of the body's center of mass is in phase with fluctuations in gravitational potential 
energy (Cavagna et al., 1964). It was also found that, humans and animals most likely store 

142 Climbing and Walking Robots 

the elastic strain energy in muscles, tendons, ligaments and perhaps even bones, thereby, re- 
ducing the fluctuations in total mechanical energy (Cavagna et al., 1964). It has been reported 
that the leg stiffness influences many kinematic variables such as the stride frequency and the 
ground contact time (Farley & Gonzalez, 1996; McMahon & Cheng, 1990). Thus, the stiffness 
of the leg is a key parameter in determining the dynamics of locomotion (Ferris et al., 1998). 
He and Farley (Farley et al., 1993; He et al., 1991) suggested that the inherent properties of 
the musculoskeletal system determine an animal's choice of leg stiffness. Their idea was sup- 
ported by (Roberts et al., 1997) who exposed that the muscles of running turkeys undergo very 
little change in length during the ground contact. Thus, the tendon may contribute most of the 
compliance of the muscle-tendon unit and greatly influence the leg stiffness (Alexander, 1988). 
In addition, adjusting the elasticity of the muscle-tendon unit during human locomotion con- 
tributes significantly to its efficiency. Thus, adjusting the stiffness of the robot's structure can 
be crucial for its energy economy which is studies in this work . 

In the context of developing the legged robots, implementation of the adjustable leg stiffness 
in a running robot has been recommended by researchers to improve the performance on var- 
ied terrain (Ferris et al., 1998). Besides allowing the robot to accommodate different surface 
conditions, the adjustable leg stiffness would permit a robot to quickly adjust its stride length 
to avoid obstacles on rocky and uneven surfaces. Research is also plentiful in the area of se- 
ries elasticity. Many of the ideas, problems and solutions of series elasticity related to this 
work , are initiated and discussed in publications of the MIT leg lab (Howard, 1990; Pratt & 
Williamson, 1995; Robinson et al., 1999; Williamson, 1995). Beyond the basics, much of the 
current research in series elasticity addresses topics such as human centered robotics (Zinn 
et al, 2004) and running robots (Hurst et al, 2004; Hurst & Rizzi, 2004). 

Seyfarth developed a simple model of legged locomotion based on compliant limb behavior 
which is more similar to the human walking behavior (natural walking) than a traditional 
model of two coupled pendula (Seyfarth, 2000). Geyer also studied the basics of the compli- 
ant walking locomotion (Geyer et al., 2002; 2005). Jena walker II was successfully developed 
at the University of Jena by continuing the research on efficient locomotion using elasticity. 
However, the stiffness of elastic element in Jena walker II is constant. The electro-mechanical 
Variable Stiffness Actuation (VSA) motor developed of the University of Pisa is designed for 
safe and fast physical human /robot interaction in manipulators (Bicchi & Tonietti, 2004). A 
series elastic actuation system based on the Bowden-cable was developed at the University 
of Twente, (Veneman et al., 2006) for manipulator robots applications. The idea of controlling 
the compliance of a pneumatic artificial muscle to reduce the energy consumption of the robot 
is practically demonstrated, (Vanderborght et al., 2006). Most of the recent research on com- 
pliant locomotion is reported by researchers (Geyer, 2005; Ghorbani, 2008; Ghorbani & Wu, 
2009a;b). 

However, none of the previous research adequately addresses the specific issues of effects 
of the adjustable stiffness elasticity on reducing the energy loss in bipedal walking robots 
through a mechanical design approach. This work seeks to fill that gap through the following 
stages of designing the adjustable stiffness artificial tendons, studying their effects on energet- 
ics of bipedal walking robots and investigating the control issues. 

The organization of this work is as follows. Section 2 describe three different conceptual de- 
signs of AS AT. The OLASAT is selected to continue of studying the energetics. However more 
information related to the advantages and limitations of each ASAT, the potential applica- 
tions of ASAT as well as the effects of ASAT on series elastic actuation systems are explained 
in articles by authors (Ghorbani, 2008; Ghorbani & Wu, 2009a). In order to capture the ba- 

On Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendons in Bipedal Walking Energetics 143 

sic behavior of OLASAT, a simple 2-DOF model of bipedal walking is illustrated in section 
3. It also summarized the normalized formulation of the equations of motion of the biped. 
Section 4 contains the calculation of the energy loss at the foot-touch-down. A controller to 
automatically adjust the stiffness of OLASAT is proposed in section 5. Then in section 6, com- 
puter simulations are carried out to demonstrate the effects of stiffness adjustment of OLASAT 
on energy efficiency during the single support stance phase. The mathematical model of the 
bipedal walking is developed in sections 3.1 and 3.2. 

2. Conceptual Design and Modeling of ASATs 

In this section, three different conceptual designs of ASAT are developed. The conceptual de- 
signs have not been fabricated in this project. The first design (section 2.1) is a rotary adjustable 
stiffness artificial tendon that is a bi-directional tendon able to apply torque in a clockwise as 
well as a counter clockwise direction. The second design (section 2.2) is a unidirectional linear 
adjustable stiffness artificial tendon that uses the concept of changing the number of active 
coils of two series springs. Finally, the third design (section 2.3) is a combination of two offset 
parallel springs that is an unidirectional tendon. The mathematical model of each tendon is 
developed. The advantages, limitations of each concept and the potential applications to the 
development of a compliant actuation system are discussed in (Ghorbani & Wu, 2009a). 

2.1 Rotary Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendon (RASAT) 

The Rotary Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendon (RASAT) is specially designed to provide a 
wide range of the angular stiffness. The schematic of RASAT is illustrated in Fig. 1. In RASAT, 
a pair of compression springs is intentionally inserted between the two concentric input and 
output links. Each spring pair consists of a low stiffness spring with a stiffness of K\ and 
a high stiffness spring with a stiffness of K 2 . The offset between the low and high stiffness 
springs has a constant value of /. Distance d, of the spring pairs with respect to the center of 
rotation of the links, is adjustable. In this case, the internal torque T, between the concentric 
input and output links is calculated from: 

K x d x = K x d 2 tan 6 I > tan 

K 1 dl-\-d(K 1 -\-K 2 )(dtan9-l) \ < tanfl ( 

where is the angular displacement between the input and output links, x is the spring de- 
flection. In Equation 1, j > tan represents the situation that only spring 1 is engaged and 
j < tan is when both springs are engaged. The stiffness of spring 2 is ]i times higher than 
the stiffness of spring 1. Thus: 

K 2 = H K t (2) 

Combining Equations 1 and 2 and converting to the following non-dimensional form: 

tane^f <>tan0 

(3) 

where d max is the maximum value of distance d. The effects of the distance ratio, -^—, on 
the output torque index, ^-J — , in RASAT are graphically illustrated in Figs. 2 and 3 where 

M U-max 

-j — u.-L. ^» shown in rig. z., uy iiLeieasiiLg me i_ii» lai Lee, u., iium z,eiu iu u-maxi 

for a given 0, the torque index, ^-J — , increases. This relationship is shown for different 

]i = 5 and -j— = 0.1. As shown in Fig. 2, by increasing the distance, d, from zero to d n 

144 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

while increases from = 5° to 6 = 15° with equal steps of 1°. The torque-angular deflection 
relation in RASAT is graphically illustrated in Fig. 3 for different values of distance indexes 
-^— . The slope of each curve in Fig. 3 is equivalent to the stiffness of the tendon. As shown 

in Fig. 3, by decreasing the ratio -^—, from 1 to 0.1 with steps of 0.1, the slopes of curves are 
reduced significantly. It has been shown in Fig. 3 that the slopes of the curves can be adjusted 
in a wide range which illustrates the capability of RASAT in adjusting the stiffness in a wide 
range. Sudden changes in the slopes of the curves in Fig. 3 are caused by engaging the high 
stiffness spring. Also, the higher the ratio -^—, the sooner the sudden change occurs. The 
effect of the stiffness ratio of the springs, \i, on the stiffness of RASAT is illustrated in Fig. 4 by 
assuming J*— = 0.8 and -j— =0.1. Increasing the ]i represents the increasing of the stiffness 
ratio of spring 2 to spring 1. In Fig. 4, the slope of the curves increases at the turning point 
that is caused by engaging spring 2 while \i increases from zero to 5 with equal increment of 
1. 

From the mechanical design point of view, RASAT (Fig. 5a & 5b) is comprised of an input 

Input Link 

Distance d is adjustable 

Fig. 1. General schematic of RASAT. A pair of two compression springs (spring 1 and spring 
2) with a constant offset, 1, are located in each side of the output link. Input and output links 
are concentric and d, the distance of springs to the center of rotation, is adjustable. 

link (Fig. 5d), an output link (Fig. 5c), four springs (not shown in Fig. 5 but is shown in Fig. 1), 
and the spring positioning mechanism that is installed on the input link as shown in Fig. 5d. 
Input and output links are concentric and a relative angular displacement between the input 
and output links, 6, can be measured using a potentiometer installed on the input link (Fig. 
5b). Two pairs of parallel helical compression springs configured in an offset are located inside 
the spring housing. The spring housing is linearly positioned by a non-back drive-able ball 
screw and a nut, which in turn, is connected to the input link. The ball screw, attached to the 
input link (Fig. 5d), rotates using a brush-less DC motor. Angular motion of the DC motor is 
converted to linear motion using a guiding shaft installed at the input link parallel to the ball 
screw. The distance d (Fig. 1), between the spring housing and the center of rotation can be 
adjusted using the feedback signal from an encoder installed at the DC motor. A bearing (Fig. 
5c) sliding on the output shaft, which is attached to the output link, is pin jointed at the spring 

On Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendons in Bipedal Walking Energetics 

145 

Fig. 2. Effects of increasing -^— in non-dimensional torque-deformation in RASAT for a con- 
stant 6. increases in equal steps of 1° from 5° to 15°. 

15 

5 10 

[deg] 

Fig. 3. Each curve shows non-dimensional torque-0 in RASAT for a constant d. -J— decreases 

° "-max 

in equal steps of 0.1 from 1 to 0.1. 

housing and has sliding motion inside the slot deployed on spring housing. Consequently, 
with a relative torque between the input and the output links, the bearing slides inside the 
spring housing and converts the angular motion between the links to the linear motion of the 
springs. The resultant force caused by the deflection of the springs creates torque through the 
output shaft via the bearing (Fig. 5c). 

2.2 Linear Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendon (LASAT) 

Linear Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendon (LASAT) is an uni-directional compression ten- 
don. LASAT is a series combination of two helical compression springs. A rigid coupler that 
connects two series springs together is illustrated in Fig. 6. Counterclockwise rotation of the 
coupler increases the number of active coils in spring 2 with the low stiffness and decreases 
the number of active coils in spring 1 with the high stiffness; and vice versa for clockwise 
rotation. Springs 1 and 2 have the stiffnesses of K s i and K S 2 respectively, which are defined 

146 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 4. Effects of increasing ]i in non-dimensional torque-0 in RASAT. 

by: 

Kc> 

El 

N s 

1,2 

(4) 

where parameter 'i' represents the i th spring and number of spring coils, N s , is assumed to 
be equal for both springs. Pi and P 2 are the coil's stiffness of the spring 1 and 2, respectively 
(Norton, 1999): 

diafGj 
~8dT 

1,2 

(5) 

where D z -, dia^ and G z - are the mean coil diameters, wire diameters, the shear modulus of the 
springs. By changing the position of the coupler, the number of the active coils of spring 1 and 
spring 2 will be defined by N\ = (1 — A)N S and N2 = AN S respectively, where < A < 1. The 
coiFs stiffness of spring 1 is assumed p times as high as spring 2, thus P\ = pP 2 . By the above 
considerations, the effective stiffness of spring 1, K a \, and the effective stiffness of spring 2, 
K a2/ are given by the following Equations: 

K a 2 

K sl 
1-A 

A 

(6) 
(7) 

The resulted stiffness of the series springs, K e q, represents the LASAT stiffness as long as the 
compression of softer spring is lower than its shut length, Ls, (where the coils are in contact) 
that is given below: 

K ( 

eq 

KglK a2 

Kal + K a2 

Pi Pi 

(1-A)N S AN S 

Pi 1 py 

(1-A)N S "•" AN S 

PK S 2 

l + (p-l)A 

(8) 

Thus, the force of the tendon is calculated by the following Equations: 

Flasat 

KeqdLASAT 

K s2 Ls + K al (d LAS AT ■ 

Ls 

1+(P-1)A 

dLASAT < Ls 
) d LASA T > LS 

1 + (P-1)A 

1 + (P-1)A 
P 

(9) 

On Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendons in Bipedal Walking Energetics 

147 

(a) RASAT 

Potentiometer 

(b) RASAT (section view) 

Output shaft 

jt shalt J^*§ 
Bearing ' M^ 

(c) Output link 

Fig. 5. 3D model of RASAT. 

DC motor 

t ; Spring housing ^^" ^ 

^^ ^Bi Screw 

^r ^^^ ** Nut 

y^F*\ <; ^P^^ -- Guiding shaft 

Spring (d) Input link ^5>^_^S 4 ' 

and respectively in its dimension-less form: 

1-LASAT 
K s2 Ls 

AlasatP 
Ls(l+(p-l)A) 
i _i_ __£__( diASAL 

1+(P-1)A n 

Ls — p 

dLASAT ^ 1 + (P~1)A 

(10) 

where di^sAT is tne deflection of the LASAT and the length Ls — ^ — — « 

is the total deflection 

of the tendon at the instance that spring 2 reaches to the shut length. Fig. 7 illustrates the 

relationship of the dimension-less resultant stiffness of the LASAT, ^ £i , to the A (the ratio of 
the number of active coils of spring 2 to N s ) for different values of p (the ratio of the coil 
stiffness of the spring 1 to the spring 2). In Fig. 7, each curve corresponds to a constant p and 
the value of p increases from 1 to 5 with increments of one. As shown, by increasing A from 
zero to one for a constant p, the resulted stiffness of LASAT, K ecj/ decreases. 
Fig. 8 shows the relation of dimension-less force index ^ AS £J , to the dimension-less deflection 
index j^ s AT , when p = 5 as well as A varies from 0.1 to 0.9 with equal steps of 0.1. As shown 
in Fig. 8, there is a discontinuity in the slope of each curve as ^ AS ^ = 1 that is caused by the 
shut length of spring 2. The slope of the curves before the shut length shown in Equation 8 
equals to -. , P _iu • The slope after the shut length equals to y^- . By increasing A, the slope 
of each curve before the shut length decreases that is resulted to the softer equivalent spring. 
On the other hand, the slope of the curve after the shut length increases. In general, helical 
springs are not acting linearly close to their the shut lengths. Thus, to reduce nonlinear effects 
on the tendon caused by coil contact and friction at the shut length, the LASAT should be 
designed in a way to prevent reaching the shut length. 

148 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

CCW Rotation 

Spring 1 
(High stiffness) 

/ 

Coupler 

\ 

Spring 2 
(Low stiffness) 

Fig. 6. Schematic of LASAT. 

Fig. 7. Non-dimensional relation of stiffness-A in LASAT before shut length. Each curve 
corresponds to a constant p while p increases from 1 to 5 with steps of 1. 

From the mechanical design point of view, LASAT is comprised of an input rod, an output 
rod, two springs and a spring positioning mechanism as shown in Fig. 9. The springs can 
slide inside the output rod and have the same coil pitch and the mean diameter, but have 
different wire diameters. The inner diameter of the output rod is assumed to be smaller in the 
area that contacts with the softer spring than in the area that contacts with the stiffer spring. 
The output force is directly applied to the low stiffness spring and a notch inside the output 
rod makes a stopper that prevents the softer spring from reaching to the shut length. The 
positioning mechanism of the coupler consists of a brush-less DC motor, a spline shaft and a 
coupling element. The outer surface of the coupler is screw threaded with the lead equal to 
the spring's coil pitch. The inner surface of the coupler holds a ball spline bush which slides 
over the spline shaft freely (as shown in Fig. 9). The rotation of the spline shaft by brush-less 
DC motor transfers to the coupling element by the ball spline. Therefore, the angular motion 
of the coupling element converts to linear motion and simultaneously changes the number of 

On Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendons in Bipedal Walking Energetics 

149 

d/Ls 
Fig. 8. Non-dimensional graph of force-deformation in LAS AT. Sudden changes in slopes of 
the curves are caused by shut length of spring 2. 

the spring coils in each spring. Also, an encoder is installed on the brush-less DC motor to 
measure the location of the coupling element. 

2.3 Offset Location Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendon (OLASAT) 

The Offset Location Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendon (OLASAT) is specially designed to 
switch the stiffness between two specific values. Here, the artificial tendon is a combination 
of two parallel springs (spring 1 and spring 2) placed with an offset. As shown in Fig. 10, the 
offset, a, is the distance between the end points of two springs when the springs are in their 
neutral lengths. By adjusting the offset using a linear actuator, the deformation requirement 
which engages spring 2 is changed. The applied force, F OLASAT/ of the tendon is a function 
of the stiffness of spring 1 with a low stiffness (X s „i), spring 2 with a high stiffness (K S p2), the 
offset (a) and the spring's deflection (doLASAT) as follows: 

r — { K S pidoLASAT 

L %JLAoAi ) K spl a + (K sp i + K sp2 ) (doLASAT 

doLASAT < a 
doLASAT > 

(11) 

The above equation in the dimensionless form appears in Equation(12) where K sp 2 is replaced 
bv riKcni • 

by V K spi 

Fqlasat 
K S pia 

< 1 

\ J_ ( \ _|_ yj )( "OLASAT — \) dpLASAT > ^ 

(12) 

The force-deflection graph of the OLASAT is illustrated in Fig. 11. r\ is the ratio of the stiffness 
of spring 2 to that of spring 1 (rj = 5 in Fig. 11). The slopes of the straight lines in Fig. 11 rep- 
resent the stiffness of OLASAT. The stiffness is suddenly switched from the stiffness of spring 
1, K sp i, to the stiffness of two parallel springs, (rj + l)K spl/ at point doiASAT = a - 
From the mechanical design point of view, OLASAT is a uni-directional tendon and consists 
of an input rod, an output rod, a low stiffness spring and a high stiffness spring, with a po- 
sitioning mechanism using a ball screw and a nut (as shown in Fig. 12). The low stiffness 

150 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 9. 3D model of LASAT. 

spring is coupled between the input and output rods. The high stiffness spring is connected 
to the input rod on one side and is free on the other side. A miniature brushless DC motor 
connected to the ball screw provides the sliding motion of the high stiffness spring over the 
slot deployed on the input rod, which can adjust the offset between the two springs. 

Spring2 ^^^ <c^ Springl 
(High stiffness) (Low stiffness) 

//////////////////////// 

Fig. 10. Schematic of the OLASAT. 

3. Bipedal walking gait in the simplified model 

A simplified model and the gait cycle of a bipedal walking robot are introduced here. The 
model offers different advantages. It is simple, and hence decreases the complexity of anal- 
ysis in energy economy. In addition, it considers the effects of OLASAT and the foot. It also 

On Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendons in Bipedal Walking Energetics 

151 

5 

re" 4 

< 

33 
o 

LL 

2 

1 

slope = r|+1 

slope = 1 / 

\^y 

11 =5 

d /a 

O LAS AT 

Fig. 11. Non-dimensional force-deformation graph of OLASAT. 

includes the double support phase and has the ability to inject energy to the biped. The dy- 
namics of the swing leg is not considered in the model to avoid complexity of the analysis. 
In the model, as shown in Fig. 13, a rigid foot with a point mass is pivoted at the ankle joint 
to a rigid stance leg with a lumped mass at the hip (upper tip of the stance leg). One end of 
OLASAT is attached to the stance leg and the other end is attached to the foot. A cable and 
pulley mechanism converts the angular movement of the ankle joint to the linear deformation 
of the springs in OLASAT. The model also includes a massless linear spring to simulate the 
force of the trailing leg during the double support stance phase. The linear spring injects the 
energy to the biped. The input energy through the spring of the trailing leg can be adjusted 
by either controlling the initial deformation of the spring or adjusting its stiffness. However 
in this work , only the effects of the stiffness adjustment of OLASAT are studied in the simu- 
lation results and the stiffness of the trailing leg spring is taken zero. To simplify the analysis, 
planar motion and friction-free joints are assumed in the bipedal walking model. 
In general, as shown in Fig. 14, the stance phase includes (in both single and double support 
periods) the collision, the rebound and the preload phases. The collision phase starts with the 
impact of the heel-strike followed by continuous motion. At the end of the collision, a second 
impact of the foot-touch-down occurs. Both impacts are assumed to be rigid to rigid, instanta- 
neous and perfectly plastic, which dissipates part of the energy of the biped. In this model, the 
offset between the two springs of OLASAT, as shown in Fig. 10, can be adjusted to store part 
of the energy of the biped during the continuous motion of the collision phase and to reduce 
the impact at the foot-touch-down. The offset is adjusted only once during the swing phase 
while there is no external load on the foot. Then it remains constant for the following sup- 
porting period. The second phase, rebound, is a continuous motion while the foot is assumed 
stationary on the ground. The stored energy in OLASAT during the collision phase returns 
to the biped during the rebound phase. The rebound phase ends at midstance (biped upright 
position). OLASAT is passively loaded during the collision phase and is passively unloaded 
during the rebound phase. The motion of the biped after midstance is named the preload 
phase which continues until the heel-strike of the following walking step (Kuo et al., 2005). 
The kinematics of the heel-strike of the following walking step is specified by step length and 
the geometry of the robot. 

The bipedal walking model in this work consists of a pre-deformed compression linear spring 
to simulate the force of the trailing leg. The linear spring of the trailing leg is massless with 

152 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

High Stiffness 
Spring 
tRod 

Output Rod 

Fig. 12. 3D model of OLASAT. 

one end connected to the toe of the foot on the ground and the other to the upper tip of the 
stance leg as shown in Fig. 13. It is also shown in Fig. 14 by B. The force vector from the com- 
pliant trailing leg (F in Fig. 14) is applied on the upper tip of the stance leg until the spring 
reaches its relaxed length (determining the end of the double support phase). By assuming 
the trailing leg as an elastic element, the model provides several advantages. The simplicity 
of dynamic modeling and analysis during impact events and the capability of injecting the 
external energy are two major advantages. 

3.1 Dynamic model of the bipedal walking 

The details of the dynamic modeling of the proposed bipedal walking model are given in 
(Ghorbani, 2008). In this section, the parameters of the simplified model of the bipedal walk- 
ing on level ground are presented. In Fig. 13, links 1 and 2 are the foot and the stance leg. 
The values of d\ and &i represent the distance between the center of mass of the foot to the 
heel and that of the body to the ankle joint respectively. l\ is the distance between the heel 
and the ankle joint, li is the distance between the ankle joint and the center of mass of the 
body which is at the upper end of the stance leg. Thus in the model, li = di. Q\ and 9i are 
denoted as the angles of the foot and the stance leg with respect to the horizontal axis as il- 
lustrated in Fig. 13. x^ and y^ represent the horizontal and vertical distance between the heel 
and a reference point O on the ground. In this work, the origin O is defined at the heel of 
the stance leg. The dimensionless parameters of the model are specified and listed in Table 1. 
Generalized coordinates of the biped are the horizontal and vertical positions of the heel as 

Parameters 

i 

xp £ v g rj v 

Equivalence 

ra 2 

h di k KiK 2 K2 Kth 
h h h m 2 l 2 g Ki m 2 g 

Table 1. Dimensionless Parameters. 

On Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendons in Bipedal Walking Energetics 

153 

Fig. 13. Bipedal walking model schematic. 

well as foot and stance leg angles with respect to the horizontal line which correspond to x^, 
yh, 6 1 and 62, respectively. The perpendicular position of the foot to the stance leg is assumed 
as a neutral position (no force) of OLASAT in this work. The heel is assumed to be pivoted 
to the ground during the collision phase by assuming enough friction force between the foot 
and the ground. Dynamic modeling of the bipedal walking, which is detailed in (Ghorbani, 
2008), includes the heel-strike, the continuous motion during the collision phase as well as the 
rebound and the preload phases. The equations of motion in the normalized form with di- 
mensionless parameters can help one to study more efficiently the bipedal walking motion in 
a generalized form. It also assists in the parametric follow-up study. The section 3.2 presents 
the normalized form of the equations of motion. 

3.2 Equations of motion in normalized form 

The dimensionless parameters of the model are specified and listed in Table 1. The equations 
of motion are normalized by w^/f/ the inertia of the stance leg about the ankle joint. Finally, by 
replacing the dimensionless parameters into the normalized form of the equations of motion, 
the normalized form of the equations of motion are arrived at. The normalized form of the 
dynamics equation at the heel-strike appears below. 

g+1 

g£+^sin(gi 

\ 

h 

£+1 

j6£+i/?cos(i 

1 

h 

h 

g£+^sin(gi) 

h 
g£+^cos(gi) 

xpcos(AO) 

1 
h 

ip cos(A0) 

1 

HSt 
HS/ 

- HS x~ 1 

m,2d\ 

- m y- 
ift-K) 

HS X 2 

— 

m 2 d\ 

(e+-e 2 ) J 

_ 

(13) 

154 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Double Support Phase 

Single Support Phase 

/|\ 

Heel Strike 

Foot Touch Down Midstance End of Step 

Collision Rebound 

Fig. 14. General Schematic of the bipedal gate. 

Preload 

where AO = 6\ — 62- The normalized form of the equations of motion at the foot-touch-down 
is 

p£ 2 + ip 2 ipcos(AO) 
xpcos(A6) 1 

FTD/ 

FTDf 

(0 2 - o 2 ) 
Equation (15) is the normalized counterpart of Equation. 

M(0)0>H(0,0)0 + G(0) + S(0) = 1(0) 
where 

M 

fi^ + ip 1 tpcos(A6) 
xpcos(AO) 1 

FTDX 

(14) 

(15) 

(16) 

H 

ipsm(0 2 -e 1 )0 2 

xpsm(e 2 -e 1 )e\ 

(17) 

fcos(6 2 ) 

(18) 

k 

-g(A0-f)- m (A0- §-«/*) 
g(A0-f) + m (A0-f-a/K) 

_ ^(Lo-L,)^ sin(gi) ms{s) + t v g (U-U)£ cos(0i) sin{s) 

- 'ML^hll sin(02 ) cos( j) + "g(U-u)£ cos( g 2) sin(J) 

(19) 

(20) 

On Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendons in Bipedal Walking Energetics 155 

The equations of motion during rebound is 

e 2 + f cos(0 2 ) +g|(0 2 - ^) +m |(0 2 - f - 1) (21) 

= - ' Vg(L °- Lt) ^ sin(e 2 )cos(<5) + ^zMl C os(e 2 )sm(S) 

The next section presents the calculations related to energy loss during the foot-touch-down, 
which is the major source of energy loss in the proposed bipedal walking model. 

4. Discussion of the energy loss 

The energy loss during the foot-touch-down is one of the major causes of energy reduction 
in bipedal walking which is reduced by properly adjusting the stiffness of OLASAT. This 
section studies the key parameters involved in the change in the kinetic energy of the biped, 
FTD AE = FTD E~ — FTD E + , before and after the foot- touch-down, shedding light on how the 
stiffness adjustment of OLASAT can reduce the energy loss. FTD AE for the model explained 
in Fig. 13 is given below. 

FTD AE = 0.5m 2 Z 2 (( FTD 0-) 2 - ( FTD 6+) 2 ) + 0.5(m^ 2 + m 2 / 2 )( FTD 6~) 2 (22) 

+m 2 / 1 / 2 cos( FTD e 2 )( FTD e-)( FTD e~) 

On the other hand FTD ^ is calculated from the equation of motion detailed in (Ghorbani, 
2008) 

FTD^ = FTDq- + /iCOsfo-fl!)™^- ^ 

By substituting of FTD 0^ from Equation (23) into Equation (22) and after simplification, the 
following relation is obtained. 

FTD AE = 0.5(m 1 ^ + m 2 /?sin 2 ( FTD 6>"))( FTD 6~) 2 (24) 

Masses, lengths of the links and sin 2 ( fTD 2 ) are all positive. Equation (24) illustrates the 
direct relation of FTD AE with ( FTD 6^) 2 . It indicates that reducing the magnitude of the 
angular velocity of the foot immediately before the foot-touch-down can significantly re- 
duce the energy loss of the biped. In addition, Equation (23) illustrates the direct relation 
of FTD 6+ - FTD 6~ with FTD 6~ which indicates that by reducing the magnitude of FTD 6~ the 
change of angular velocity of the stance leg at the foot- touch-down is reduced. 
By taking the time derivative of the position of the center of mass (COM) of the body, 
FTD Y' COM , its velocity is arrived at as given below: 

FTD W = h FTD K + h FTD e 2 " cos( FTD 6 2 ) (25) 

FTD 62 and cos( FTD 2 ) are negative before midstance. The optimum situation FTD AE = can 
be achieved by reducing ( FTD 6^ ) 2 to zero. In such a scenario, the velocity of the COM of the 
body at the foot-touch-down will be upward. This indicates that the direction of the velocity 
vector of the COM of the body at the heel-strike HS Yqom' wn i° n ^ s downward, should be re- 
versed to the upward direction at the foot-touch-down during the collision phase to reduce 

156 Climbing and Walking Robots 

the energy loss. This is made possible by storing part of the kinetic energy of the biped in elas- 
tic form during the collision phase. This notion can be reinforced in human walking. Donelan 
expressed that humans redirect the center of mass velocity during step-to-step transitions not 
with instantaneous collisions, but with negative work performed by the leading leg over a 
finite period of time (Donelan & Kuo, 2002; Donelan et al., 2002). These findings serve as the 
foundation to determine the offset of OLASAT. As a result, the development of an automatic 
controller to adjust the stiffness of OLASAT is necessary to improve the performance of the 
bipedal walking which is described in the following section. 

5. Design of the stiffness adjustment controller 

In general, OLASAT has two major roles during the collision phase. The first role is to com- 
pensate the moment about the ankle joint exerted by the gravitational force of the body. The 
second is to store part of the kinetic energy of the biped. Both of these two roles can reduce 
( F TD 6~ ) 2 . This section provides a guideline for determining the offset of OLASAT, a, in order 
to store part of the energy of the biped, thus reducing ( FTD 6^) 2 , and consequently reduc- 
ing the energy loss. The development of a controller to satisfy such an optimal condition of 
( FTD 6^) 2 = can be possible by predicting the dynamics of the bipedal walking in advance. 
On the other hand, perfectly predicting the dynamics of the biped is not realistic because of 
the complexity of physical robots. Thus, a controller is developed in this section to estimate 
the offset of OLASAT without requiring the full knowledge of the system dynamics. To design 
such a controller, the following assumptions are made in this work. 

First, OLASAT is loaded and unloaded passively during the stance phase. Thus for the fol- 
lowing walking step, the offset is adjusted during the swing phase of the current walking step 
while the foot is not in contact with the ground. Second, the feedback signals of the biped 
are taken to be the angular position, 02, and the angular velocity, 02, of the stance leg. The 
reason for specifying these two signals as feedback is that the biped is an inverted pendulum 
during the rebound and the preload phases. Thus, the velocity of the biped at the heel-strike 
of the following walking step can be determined from the angular velocity of the stance leg 
at midstance, MD 02- This choice allows enough time to adjust the offset during the swing 
phase which is important from the practical point of view. Third, the foot is perpendicular 
to the stance leg immediately before the heel-strike and in such a situation, OLASAT is in the 
neutral position (with no force). Fourth, the step length is fixed by assuming that the swing 
leg is perfectly controlled. Fifth, the angular displacement of the stance leg relative to the 
ground is negligible during the collision phase. This assumption results in the approximation 
of FTD 02~ = HS 02~. It ensures that the total deformation of spring 1 in OLASAT is equal to 
R HS 6^ . HS 0j~ and HS 02~ are the 6\ and 02 immediately before the heel-strike which are known 
from the walking step length. 

The stiffness adjustment controller developed here determines the offset of OLASAT, a, which 
corresponds to the angular offset of ^ at the pulley of the ankle joint. Here, the maximum 
angular displacement of the pulley (A#), in which spring 2 is engaged during the collision 
phase, is determined first to calculate the offset. Before determining the offset, we first discuss 
the selection of the stiffness of spring 1 of OLASAT. The stiffness of spring 1 must be selected 
low enough to prevent the leg from bouncing during the collision phase even for minimum 
bipedal walking speed while spring 2 is not engaged (minimum stiffness of OLASAT). It must 
also be selected high enough to compensate a portion of the gravitational moment about the 
ankle joint at the foot- touch-down and also to store part of the kinetic energy of the biped. 
Next, we explain the procedure of determining A#. 

On Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendons in Bipedal Walking Energetics 157 

A#(n + 1) is calculated from the feedback loop of the stiffness adjustment controller for the 
walking step n+1. Walking step n is started from the heel-strike which includes the double 
support phase and will end immediately before the heel-strike of the step n+1. The inputs 
of the stiffness adjustment controller are the angular velocity of the stance leg at midstance, 
MD 62(H), of the current walking step n, and the stiffness of the trailing leg spring of the fol- 
lowing walking step, K t (n + l). The output of the stiffness adjustment controller is the offset 
of OLASAT for the walking step n+1. Kt(n + 1) can be determined using a speed tracking 
controller to inject energy to the biped which is not discussed in this work and further infor- 
mation is referred to (Ghorbani, 2008). 

Part of the kinetic energy of the biped at the end of the walking step n is stored in the trailing 
leg spring during the collision phase of the walking step n+1. Based on the results obtained in 
Section 4, the OLASAT should also store part of the kinetic energy during the collision phase of 
the walking step n+1. Here, the elastic potential energy, 0.5i<C S p2^ 2 (A^(n + l)) 2 , of the walk- 
ing step n+1 stored in spring 2 is assumed to be proportional to the difference between the 
kinetic energy of the biped at the end of the walking step n, 05m2(h EN ^ (n) sin(<pQ(n))) 2 , 
associated with the vertical component of the velocity of the COM of the body, and the elastic 
potential energy of trailing leg spring, \K t (kL 2 col — AL 2 ,^), during the collision phase of the 
walking step n+1 where <po(n) = f — EN ^ (n). EN 02~(n) and EN 02~(ft) are the angle and the 
angular velocity of the stance leg at the end of the preload phase of the walking step n. AL^ SS 
and AL C0 | are the deformation of the tailing leg spring at the heel-strike and the deformation of 
the tailing leg spring at the foot- touch-down of the walking step n+1. The following equation 
describes the above energy relation. 

^K sp2 R 2 (M(n + l)) 2 = \K adjust (m 2 {h EN 2 (n) sin( f0 (n))) 2 - K t (n + l)(AL 2 o/ - AL 2 SS )) 

(26) 
^adjust i s a proportional gain and AL co j = Lq— FTD Lt, where FTD Lt is the length of the trailing 
leg spring at the foot- touch-down of the walking step n+1 which can be calculated from the 
kinematics of the biped using the following assumptions. Here, the stiffness of the trailing 
leg should be limited preventing the right hand side of Equation (26) from having a negative 
value. The step length and the initial angles of the foot and the stance leg for the walking 
step n+1 are known values in this work. Preload is also assumed as a free rotating inverted 
pendulum under gravity. EN 02 (n) can be calculated from the angular velocity of the leg at 
midstance, MD 02( n ), using the following energy relation: 

0.5m 2 l 2 ( EN 2 (n)) 2 = 0.5m 2 / 2 ( MD 2 (n)) + m 2 gl 2 (l - cos(<p («))) (27) 

The first term in the right-hand side of the above relation is the kinetic energy of the biped 
at midstance of the walking step n which is measurable from the feedback signals. It is as- 
sumed that the double support phase is ended before the midstance. Thus the injected energy, 
through the trailing leg spring during the double support phase of the walking step n, is con- 
verted to the kinetic energy of the biped which is measured at the midstance. The second term 
of the right-hand side of Equation (27) is the change in the gravitational potential energy of 
the biped between the midstance of the walking step n and the heel-strike of the walking step 
n+1 which can be calculated by assuming a fixed amount for the step length. By calculating 

EN Q-{n) from Equation (27), which results in EN Q-{n) = ^/ MD ^( n ) + ^(1 - cos(<p («)))/ 

158 Climbing and Walking Robots 

and by substituting it into Equation (26), A#(n + 1) is determined to be as follows. 

^adjust 

M(n + l) = J^-^/m 2 (l 2 m^(n)sm(<Po(n))) 2 -K t (n + l)(ALl ol -ALl s ) (28) 

Finally, as mentioned above by assuming that the angular movement of the stance leg relative 
to the ground is negligible during the collision phase, the offset -|(ft + 1) is calculated from 
the relation below. 

| (n + 1) = HS 6~ (n + 1) - A0(n + 1) (29) 

The next section presents the simulation results of the bipedal walking motion in different 
case studies. 

6. The study of energetics through simulations 

The effects of the adjustable stiffness artificial tendon on the energetics of bipedal walking is 
studied in this section through computer simulations. In section 6.1, the simulation results 
of bipedal walking are illustrated during the single support phase for a single walking step. 
The simulation results show significant improvement in reducing the energy loss by proper 
adjustment of the stiffness of OLASAT. Then, the simulation results of the robot during single 
support phase are presented for 5 consecutive walking steps in section 6.2 to compare the 
results of the two cases of the single spring with best selected stiffness and OLASAT with 
the well-adjusted stiffness. Finally the controller developed in section 5 is implemented to 
automatically adjust the offset of OLASAT for reducing energy loss during the collision phase. 

6.1 Stance phase of bipedal walking during a single walking step 

In this section, a realization of the single support phase of bipedal walking is demonstrated for 
two different cases of a single spring and OLASAT during a single walking step. The stiffness 
of the single spring equals the stiffness of the spring 1 in OLASAT. Here, the stiffness of spring 
1 in OLASAT is defined through trial and error. The objective was to find a stiffness which 
prevents the leg bouncing at the FTD for wide range of initial velocities, and which is high 
enough to store the elastic energy during the collision phase. In order to study the effects of 
stiffness adjustment on the energy economy of the biped, simulations are performed for the 
same initial conditions for both cases. 

The parameters of the biped in computer simulations are listed in Table 2 in addition to m^ = 
lkg and \i — 1.0m. The initial conditions of the biped immediately before the heel-strike in 

Parameters 

P 

q C v g v 

Value 

0.02 

0.05 0.07 0.1 0.5 4 

Table 2. Dimensionless Parameters of the simulations. 

the simulation are specified as follows: HS 6~ = 15°, HS 6~ = 105°, x h = y h = 0, HS 6~ = HS 
0^=0 and cpQ = 11.7°. The initial translational velocity Vq of the biped before the heel-strike 
has the magnitude of 1.5m /s with the horizontal angle of — cpo- 

Using those initial conditions, the total kinetic energy of the biped before the heel-strike is 
equal to 1.125 [J]. The stiffness of the trailing leg spring is assumed zero in this section, (v = 0), 
to simulate the biped's motion with no external elastic energy input. Note that the dynamics 

On Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendons in Bipedal Walking Energetics 159 

of the swing leg is not assumed in the model. 

Fig. 15 shows the simulation results of the biped in case 1 (single spring with best selected 
stiffness) and case 2 (OLASAT with well-adjusted stiffness). OLASATs offset value in case 2 
is provided using a trial and error procedure, ^ = 6.0°, which reduces the angular velocity 
of the foot before the foot-touch-down to decrease the energy loss. Fig. 15a shows the joint 
angles of the biped 0\, 62 which indicate that the motion of the biped is sustained in both cases. 
Fig. 15b shows the magnitudes of the velocity vector of the COM of the body. As shown in 
Fig. 15b, the velocity jump of the COM of the body during the FTD in case 2, which equals 0.01 
j£, is significantly lower than case 1, which equals 0.15 ^. Consequently, the final velocity 
of the COM of the body is higher in case 2 compared to case 1. These results indicate that 
the biped can sustain the motion during the stance phase in both cases. Dimensionless kinetic 
energy k, is defined as the ratio of the kinetic energy of the biped to its gravitational potential 
energy at midstance, m^l^g- Fig. 15c depicts the k versus time, and the comparison of the 
results indicates that the kinetic energy loss at the FTD is significantly reduced in case 2, that 
is by 1%, resulting from the proper adjustment of the OLASAT, compared to the k in case 1 
which is as high as 20%. These results illustrate the effects of proper stiffness adjustment of 
OLASAT on the energetics of the bipedal walking. The significant reduction in energy loss 
during the FTD in case 2 results in higher final velocity of the body compared to the case 1. 
The displacement of the COM of the body during the collision phase together with its velocity 
vector is shown in Fig. 15d. Fig. 15d shows that the vertical component of the velocity of the 
body's COM is gradually decreased during the collision phase which can reduce the energy 
loss at the FTD as discussed in Section 4. 

The dimensionless parameter of T an n e is the ratio of the torque of the ankle joint exerted by 
OLASAT to m2gh during the single support stance phase. The graph of T an \\ e versus time is 
given in Fig. 16 for the above two cases. The exerted torque by OLASAT in case 1 is much 
lower than case 2. As shown in Fig. 16, the graphs include different sudden changes of slopes 
of the T an ] i i e in the time period of the stance phase. In case 1, this behavior is caused by the 
end of the collision phase defined by point B and by the end of the rebound phase defined 
by F. OLASAT performs differently in case 2 while both of the springs are engaged in part of 
the time period of the motion. At the beginning of case 2, spring 2 is not engaged. After A 
in Fig. 16, both springs are engaged and they will remain engaged up to D. The change of 
slope in case 2 at C occures at the end of the collision phase. Point E is also defined by the 
end of the rebound phase in case 2. Figure 16 indicates that in OLASAT more energy is stored 
and released during the stance phase. To continue this study, the next section illustrates the 
effectiveness of adjusting the stiffness of the OLASAT in consecutive walking steps. 

6.2 Bipedal walking simulations in consecutive steps 

In the last section, a single step of bipedal walking was realized by implementing the OLASAT 
at the ankle joint. In this section, the simulation results of the bipedal walking in consecutive 
steps are presented. The goal is to demonstrate and quantify the effects of adjusting the stiff- 
ness of the ankle joint on multiple steps of the bipedal walking. During consecutive walking, a 
gravitational energy of the mass of the foot is injected to the biped caused by leg's initial angle 
in each walking step. For the first walking step, the same biped configuration and the same 
initial conditions as in Section 6.1 are used. The biped is moving on level ground. To demon- 
strate the kinetic energy loss of the biped in this section, Ax n is defined as the dimensionless 
ratio of the total kinetic energy loss of the biped after n walking steps to the gravitational po- 
tential energy of the biped, m^gl^, at midstance. 

160 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

0.972 

-0.21 -0.205 

-0.195 -0.19 -0.185 -0.18 -0.175 
x [meter] 

Fig. 15. Simulation results during the single support stance period for both cases of single 
spring, easel, and OLASAT with well-adjusted stiffness, case 2. (a)- Joint angles vs. time, (b)- 
Velocity of COM of the body vs time, (c)- Dimensionless kinetic energy of the biped vs time, 
(d)- Position and velocity vector of COM of the body during the collision phase. 

Fig. 17 illustrates the velocity of the COM of the body in 5 consecutive walking steps. It also 
demonstrates that the motion of the biped is sustained in all steps for all cases. For the case 
of a single spring, it shows how stepping forward increases the period of each walking step. 
Reducing the average velocity of the biped is caused by the energy loss of the impact events. 
On average, for the single spring with the bests stiffness, 8% of the kinetic energy of the biped 
is dissipated in each step and A7C5 = 0.0892. For the case of OLASAT the changes in the step 
period and velocity of the COM of the body are insignificant as compared with those for the 
case of the single spring. On average in this case, 0.5% of the kinetic energy of the biped is 
dissipated in each walking step when AK5 = 0.0527. These results show how the OLASAT, 
with ability of proper adjustment of the stiffness, significantly improves the energetics of the 
biped and makes it more efficient. This justifies the developement of an automated stiffness 
adjustment controller. 

Fig. 17 also illustrates the velocity of the COM of the body in 5 consecutive walking steps 
while the stiffness of OLASAT is adjusted automatically, explained in Section 5. In order to 
simulate the well-adjusted stiffness, ^ is assumed to be 6.0° in the first walking step. The 
proportional gain of the automated stiffness adjustment controller, K ad j ust/ can play an im- 
portant role in optimally adjusting the offset. Optimal iteration procedure to obtain the best 
gain remains as future research. Through trial and error simulations, it has been observed 

On Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendons in Bipedal Walking Energetics 

161 

0.15 0.2 0.25 
Time [sec] 

Fig. 16. Dimensionless torque of OLASAT vs. time during single support stance phase for 
both cases of single spring and OLASAT with well-adjusted stiffness. 

that adaptive adjusting of K ad j ust/ as a function of the angular velocity of the stance leg at 
midstance, provides a better performance of the controller. Thus, in the simulation results of 
this section, the relation K a ^ ust = 3/^° ^2 is assumed. The controller is activated after the 
first walking step by sensing the angular velocity of the stance leg at midstance. As shown 
in Fig. 17, the sudden change in the velocity of the COM of the body is significantly reduced 
with compare to both the single spring and fixed stiffness. The energy loss is also significantly 
reduced, Ak = 0.052, compared to case 1 and 2. 

7. Conclusions 

This work introduced different designs of adjustable stiffness artificial tendons. The modeling 
and detail conceptual design of each tendon were given. Then the results of the effects of 
stiffness adjustment of the ankle joint on energetics of the bipedal walking robots were 
presented. A methodology to reduce the energy loss was presented through three main 
efforts. In the first effort, one of the adjustable-stiffness artificial tendon, named OLASAT, 
was selected which is capable of storing and releasing the elastic energy during walking. 
In the second effort, a simplified model of the bipedal walking robot in the stance phase 
was developed which consists of a foot, a leg and an OLASAT which is installed parallel 
to the ankle joint. Such a model was used to compare the effects of a single spring and a 
well-adjusted stiffness OLASAT on reducing the energy loss during foot-touch-down. As 
the third effort, a simple controller based on energy feedback was designed to adjust the 
stiffness of OLASAT. Computer simulations were carried out to compare the energy loss 
of the biped in the two cases of the single spring and the well-adjusted stiffness OLASAT. 

162 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

1.3 
| 1.2 

"f 1-1 

> 1 

0.9 
0.8 
0.7 

14 |^A7M^iJ k ~ con,raiier 

V 

Well adjusted OLASAT 

/ 

Single spring 

0.5 

1 1.5 

Time [sec] 

2.5 

Fig. 17. Velocity of COM of the body vs time during 5 multiple walking steps for three cases 
of single spring, OLASAT with well-adjusted stiffness and stiffness adjustment controller. 

Proper adjustment of the stiffness significantly reduces the kinetic energy loss during the 
foot- touch-down from 20% (of the single spring) to 1%. Simulation results of the biped during 
multiple walking steps illustrate that proper stiffness adjustment of OLASAT significantly 
improves the energetics of the bipedal walking. On average, the kinetic energy loss during 
multiple walking steps is reduced from 8% to 0.5% in each walking step. Simulation results 
illustrated that the automated stiffness adjustment controller can successfully reduce the 
energy loss during the stance phase. In general, the simulation results of this work suggest 
that various designs of the adjustable stiffness artificial tendons can be included in robot 
structures to achieve better energetics. 

8. References 

Alexander, R. M. (1988). Elastic mechanisms in animal movement, Cambridge University Press. 

Alexander, R. M. & Bennett, M. B. (1989). How elastic is a running shoe?, New Scientist 123: 45- 
6. 

Bicchi, A. & Tonietti, G. (2004). Fast and soft-arm tactics [robot arm design], IEEE Robotics and 
Automation Magazine 11(2): 22-33. 

Cavagna, G. A., Heglund, N. G. & Taylor, C. R. (1977). Mechanical work in terrestrial locomo- 
tion: two basic mechanisms for minimizing energy expenditure, American Journal of 
Physiology 233: 243-261. 

Cavagna, G. A., Saibene, F. P. & Margaria, R. (1964). Mechanical work in running, Journal of 
Applied Physiology 19: 249-256. 

On Adjustable Stiffness Artificial Tendons in Bipedal Walking Energetics 163 

Coleman, M. & Ruina, A. (1998). An uncontrolled toy that can walk but cannot stand still, 

Physical Review Letters 80(16): 3658-3661. 
Collins, S. H., Wisse, M. & Ruina, A. (2001). A three-dimensional passive-dynamic walking 

robot with two legs and knees, International Journal of Robotics Research 20(7): 607-615. 
Donelan, J.M. Kram, R. & Kuo, A. (2002). Mechanical work for step-to step transitions is a 

major determinant of the metabolic cost of human walking, Journal of Experimental 

Biology 205: 3717-3727. 
Donelan, M. J., Kram, R. & Kuo, A. D. (2002). Simultaneous positive and negative external 

mechanical work in human walking, Journal of Biomechanical Engineering 35: 117-124. 
Farley, C. T., Glasheen, J. & McMahon, T. A. (1993). Running springs: speed and animal size, 

Journal of Experimental Biology 185: 71-86. 
Farley, C. T. & Gonzalez, O. (1996). Leg stiffness and stride frequency in human running, 

Journal of Biomechanics 29: 181-186. 
Ferris, D. P., Louie, M. & Farley, C. T. (1998). Running in the real world: adjusting leg stiffness 

for different surfaces, The Royal Society B: Biological Sciences pp. 989-994. 
Garcia, M. S. (1999). Stability, scaling, and chaos in passive dynamic gait models, PhD thesis, 

Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, Cornell University. 
Geyer, H. (2005). Simple models of legged locomotion based on compliant limb behavior, PhD thesis, 

University of Jena. 
Geyer, H., Blickan, R. & Seyfarth, A. (2002). Natural dynamics of spring-like running- 
emergence of self stability, 5th International Conference on Climbing and Walking Robots 

pp. 87-91. 
Geyer, H., Seyfarth, A. & Blickhan, R. (2005). Spring-mass running: simple approximate 

solution and application to gait stability, Journal of Theoretical Biology 232(3): 315-328. 
Ghorbani, R. (2008). On controllable stiffness bipedal walking, PhD thesis, Mechanical and Man- 
ufacturing Engineering, University of Manitoba. 
Ghorbani, R. & Wu, Q. (2009a). Conceptual design of the adjustable stiffness artificial tendons 

for legged robotics, Mechanism and Machine Theory 44(1): 140-161. 
Ghorbani, R. & Wu, Q. (2009b). On improving bipedal walking energetics through adjusting 

the stiffness of elastic elements at the ankle joint, International Journal of Humanoid 

Robots, In revision 6(1): 23-48. 
He, J. P., Kram, R. & McMahon, T. A. (1991). Mechanics of running under simulated low 

gravity, Journal of Applied Physiology 71: 863-870. 
Howard, R. D. (1990). Joint and actuator design for enhanced stability in robotic force control, PhD 

thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Hurst, J., Chestnutt, J. & Rizzi, A. (2004). An actuator with physically variable stiffness for 

highly dynamic legged locomotion, International Conference on Robotics and Automa- 
tion pp. 4662-4667. 
Hurst, J. & Rizzi, A. (2004). Physically variable compliance in running, International Conference 

on Climbing and Walking Robots pp. 123-132. 
Kuo, A. D., Donelan, J. M. & Ruina, A. (2005). Energetic consequences of walking like 

an inverted pendulum: step-to-step transitions, Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews 

33(2): 88-97. 
McGeer, T. (1990). Passive dynamic walking, The International Journal of Robotics Research 9: 62- 

82. 
McMahon, T. & Cheng, G. (1990). The mechanics of running: how does stiffness couple with 

speed, Journal of Biomechanics 23 (Suppl. 1): 65-78. 

164 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Norton, R. L. (1999). Design of machinery , Thomas Casson. 

Pratt, G. A. & Williamson, M. (1995). Series elastic actuators, IEEE International Conference on 
Intelligent Robots and Systems pp. 399-406. 

Roberts, T. J., Marsh, R. L., Weyand, P. G. & Taylor, C. R. (1997). Muscular force in running 
turkeys: the economy of minimizing work, Science 275: 1113-1115. 

Robinson, D. W., Pratt, J. E., Paluska, D. J. & Pratt, G. A. (1999). Series elastic actuator devel- 
opment for a biomimetic walking robot, Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics pp. 19-22. 

Seyfarth, A. (2000). Elastically Operating Eegs - Strategies and Construction Principles, PhD thesis, 
University of Jena. 

Vanderborght, B., Verrelst, B., Van Ham, R., Van Damme, M., Lefeber, D., Duran, B. M. Y. & 
Beyl, P. (2006). Exploiting natural dynamics to reduce energy consumption by con- 
trolling the compliance of soft actuators, The international Journal of Robotics Research 
25(4): 343-358. 

Veneman, J., Ekkelenkamp, R., Kruidhof, R. & van der Helm, F. C. T. (2006). A series elastic- 
and bowden-cable-based actuation system for use as torque actuator in exoskeleton- 
type robots, The international Journal of Robotics Research 25(3): 261-281. 

Williamson, M. M. (1995). Series elastic actuators, PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Tech- 
nology. 

Wisse, M. (2004). Essentials of dynamic walking: analysis and Design of Two-Eegged Robots, PhD 
thesis, T.U. Delft. 

Wisse, M. & Frankenhuyzen, J. V (2006). Design and construction of mike; a 2d autonomous 
biped based on passive dynamic walking, Adaptive Motion of Animals and Machines 
pp. 143-154. 

Zinn, M., Roth, B., Khatib, O. & Salisbury, J. K. (2004). New actuation approach for human 
friendly robot design, The International Journal of Robotics Research 23(4-5): 379-398. 

10 

Mathematical Modelling and Simulation 

of Combined Trajectory Paths 

of a Seven Link Biped Robot 

Ahmad Bagheri, Behnam Miripour-Fard and Peiman Naseradin Mousavi 

The University ofGuilan, Faculty of Engineering 

Iran 

1. Introduction 

The humanoid robot is designed like human for doing various tasks and adapting to 
human's environment. Next generation humanoids are expected to successfully coexist 
within human environments. This imposes very difficult challenges to researchers to 
produce truly dynamic movements to maintain balance under unexpected changes of paths. 
There are vast majority of studies on single trajectory paths of the biped robot (Bagheri & 
Mousavi, 2007; Mousavi & Bagheri, 2007) while combined trajectory paths have not received 
much attention. In this chapter, we have hence focused on generation of combined trajectory 
paths with the aid of mathematical interpolation. Zarrugh and Radcliffe (1997) have 
considered a biped robot with respect to a walking pattern by recording human kinematic 
data while McGeer (1990) have focused on passive walking of a biped robot generated by 
gravitational and inertial components. Silva and Machado (1999) have focused on actuator 
power and energy by the adaptation of walking parameters. The stability of the robot is 
connected to the biped robot's tendency to tip over. Zheng and Shen (1990) have considered 
a method of gait synthesis with respect to static stability while Chevallereau (1998) have 
focused on dynamic stability with the aid of a low energy reference trajectory definition. 
Takanishi et al. (1985), Shih et al. (1990), Hirai et al. (1998), and Dasgupta and Nakamura 
(1999) have considered the robot dynamic stability with respect to the walking process 
based on the zero moment point (ZMP) method. With respect to the various conditions of 
combined trajectory paths, Shih (1997, 1999), Huang et al. (2001) utilized methods to 
generate the trajectory paths of the robot where they carried out simulation of the combined 
trajectory paths. 

The current chapter focuses on the inverse kinematic and dynamic methods for providing 
the robot combined trajectory paths in order to obtain a smooth motion of the robot. This 
procedure avoids the link's velocity discontinuities of the robot in order to mitigate the 
occurrence of impact effects and also helps to obtain a suitable control process. The main 
contribution of this work consists of a new method for simulation of a seven link biped 
robot over combined trajectory paths in order to study the effects of hip height over the 
torso's modified motion. The process has been performed based on the system given 
breakpoints and either third-order spline or Vandermonde matrix interpolation method. 

166 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

The employed methods generate the desired combined trajectory paths to avoid oscillation 
of the paths because of the high order of the polynomials. The simulations have been carried 
out for combined trajectory paths. Similar to human gait, the robot's feet make negative, 
zero and positive angles with the ground. 

2. Kinematic modelling 

The mathematical interpolation is one of the simplest methods utilized for obtaining the 
suitable curves with respect to the given break points that the robot must undergo. The 
process of inverse kinematics with the aid of the defined combined trajectory paths (they 
have been indicated by the operator) and also solving the nonlinear equations for the robot 
movement will result in the needed parameters. Parameters such as joint angles will be 
calculated for use in dynamics and the subsequent controlling equations before the actual 
calculation of the actuator torques. The actuator torques will be used in the indicated 
combined trajectory paths. In the current chapter, the simplest mathematical interpolations 
which are "Vandermonde matrix" and " third-order spline' 7 (Mousavi & Bagheri, 2007; 
Huang et al., 2001) have been used. The mathematical equations of a biped robot are 
nonlinear systems of equations which contain complex mathematical relations. In Figs. 1 
and 2, the robot sagittal schematic has been presented to indicate the required nodes and the 
utility of the mentioned curves. With utilization of the specified criteria, the generated paths 
will be exploited in the designed software to obtain the kinematic parameters. 
In general and with respect to Fig. 1, all the needed and important robot parameters are 
listed as follows: 

(a) Hip parameters: The hip parameters include the vertical and horizontal 
displacements of the joint (zh, Xh) and the variables which are displayed by Figs. 1 
and 2, respectively. The distance between the hip and the fixed coordinate system 
(which is on the support leg) will be denoted for the instants of the beginning and 
the end points of the double support phase by x e d, x s d, respectively (Huang et al., 
2001). 

(b) Foot parameters: During the walking cycle, the horizontal and vertical 
displacements of ankle joint are displayed by x a , z a , respectively. The other 
parameters are as follows: 

Fig. 1. The robot variables. 

Mathematical Modelling and Simulation 

of Combined Trajectory Paths of a Seven Link Biped Robot 

167 

Fig. 2. The hip variables: x e d, x s d- 

T c total traveling time including single and double support phases 

Td double support phase time which is regarded as -20% of T c 

T m the time at which the ankle joint has reached the maximum height during the 

walking cycle 

k step number 

H ao ankle joint maximum height 

L ao the horizontal distance traveled between the ankle joint and the start point when 

the ankle joint has reached its maximum height 

D s step length 

c\b, cjf foot lift angle and contact angle with the level ground 

q gs , qgf the ground initial terrain angles 

h s t stair level height 

H s t foot maximum height from stair level. 

2.1. Foot trajectory interpolation 

Five phases are required for calculation of the foot's combined trajectory path as shown in 
Fig. 3; they are derived as follow: 

-First and fifth phases: 

3,(0 = 

-Second phase: 

0.(0 = 

-y& 

t = kT 

-q b 

t = kT c + T d 

q f 

t = (k + \)T c 

3 ^ 

t = (k + \)T c+ T d 

V S s 

t = kT 

lb 

t = kT c + T d 

f +A 

t = (k + l)T c 

, f +* 

t = (k + l)T c+ T d 

(1) 

(2) 

168 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

-Third phase: 

-Fourth phase: 

*.(') = 

*.(') = 

-«,+ a * = «; 

-<?„+! t = kT c +T d 

q f +X t = {k + \)T c 

q,+X t = (k + \)T c +T d 

-q gs +X t = kT c 
-q b +X t = kT c +T d 
q f t = (k + \)T c 

q sf t = {k + \)T c +T d 

(3) 

(4) 

In the current process of the polynomial determination, boundary conditions of the 
movement play an important role for calculation of the combined trajectory paths. The 
required boundary conditions are derived with respect to the system requirements. Similar 
to the human walking process, foot angular velocity ( 6 a ) at the specified moments including 
the instants of the beginning and the end of foot traveling is equal to zero: 

a [t = kT c ,t = kT c+ T d ] = O 

(5) 

With respect to relations (l)-(4), a third-order spline can be utilized to provide the foot 

trajectory for the combined trajectory paths. Similar processes are exploited to calculate the 

trajectory paths for the displacements of horizontal and vertical foot traveling as shown 

below. 

The displacement of the horizontal coordinates of the foot for the calculated breakpoints can 

be obtained as follows: 

-First phase (Mousavi, 2006): 
[kD 

a level ground 

(0 = 

t = kT 

kD s +l an smq b +l af (l-cosq b ) t = kT c +T d 

kD s +L ao t = kT+T m 

(k + 2)D s - l an sin q f - l ab (1 - cos# f ) t = (k + \)T c 

(k + 2)D s 

-Second phase: 

,(0 = 

KhD s 

k ch D s + l an sin q b + l af (1 - cos q b ) 

K„D S +L m 

(k ch +2)D s +(D s -lJcosA — - 

l m sin(^r / + X) + l at cos(q f +X) 
(k ch + l)D s + D s cos X - l m sin q f 

t = {k + \)T c +T d 

t = kT c 
t = kT c +T d 
t = kT c +T m 
t = {k + \)T c 

t = (k + T)T+T d 

(6) 

(7) 

Mathematical Modelling and Simulation 

of Combined Trajectory Paths of a Seven Link Biped Robot 

169 

-Third phase: 

-Fourth phase: 

,(*)■ 

-Fifth phase: 

2 (0 = 

-Six phase: 

2 (t)- 

'(**+!) A 

(k ch + 1) A + L sin lb + h f (1 " cos q b ) 
(k ch + \)D s + L ao cos A 
,( (*«* +l)D s +(2D s -l ab )co$A-- 

L sin (#/ + ^) + L cos(g / +2) 
(^ + 1) A + 2 A cos A - / fln sin ^ 

(k ch + 1) A + Dec st D s cos 1 - / an sin A 

(k ch + 1) A + (Dec st D s + / fl/ ) cos A - • • • 

/ fl/ cos(g 6 - A) + / an cos(g 6 - A) 

(£ cA +1)A + (A^ + L ao )cosA 

(k ch + 1) A + ((Dec st + 2) A - / a b ) cos A - • • • 

L sin (^/ + x ) + ^ cos(g / +2) 

(£ cA + 1) A + (^ ec rf + 2) A cos A - / fln sin q f 

(k ch + \)D s + (Dec st + 1) A cos A - l an sin A 

(k ch + \)D ss + ((Dec « + 1) A + K f ) cos A - • • 

/ fl/ cosfe - /I) + / fln cosfe - A) 

(k ch + 1) A + ((£>ec w + 1) A + L ao ) cos A 

(^ + 1) A + ((k ch2 - k chl ) A ) cos A + A + • 

^cos(^ / -l)-/ fln sing / 

(^ +1)A +fc 2 -^)A cosA + a 

'(fc cA + 1) A + (A^ + 2) A cos /I - l an sin A 

(*c* + 1) A + ((#** + 2) A + / fl/ ) cos 2 - • • 

/ a/ cos(g^ - yl) + / an cos(g 6 - A) 

(k ch + 1) A + i(k ch2 - k chl ) A ) cos A + A 

(^ + 1) A + ((k ch2 - k chl ) A ) cos A + 2 A + 

^cos(^ / -l)-/ fln sin^ / 

(^ + 1) A + (^ 2 - ^ ) A cos A + 2 A 

t = kT c +T m 
t = (k + \)T c 

t = (k + \)T c+ T d 

t = kT 

t = kT c+ T d 

t = kT c +T m 
t = (k + l)T 

t = (k + \)T c+ T d 

t = kT c 
t = kT+T d 

t = kT c +T m 
t = (k + \)T c 

t = (k + \)T c+ T d 

t = kT 
t = kT c+ T d 

t = kT c +T m 
t = (k + \)T c 

t = (k + \)T c +T d 

(8) 

(9) 

(10) 

(11) 

170 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

-Seven phase: 

a , level ground V 

(k ck + X)D s + {{k chl - k M )D, ) cos X + Lev sl D s 
(k ch + \)D ss + ((k chl - k M )D, ) cos X + Lev s ,D s -■■■ 
l af (1 - cos q b ) + l m cos q b 
(') = \(Kh +1)D. +((*« -k M )D s )cosX + Lev sl D s +L ai 
(k ch + 1)D, + {{k ch2 - k cU )D, ) cos X + • • • 
(Lev M + 2)D s + l at cos(q f -l) - l an sin q f 
(k ch + \)D, + (k ch2 - k M )D s cos X + (Lev,, + 2)D, 

t = kT c 

t = kT c +T d 

t = kT c + T m 
t = (k + l)T c 

t = (k + \)T c +T d 

(12) 

The displacement of the vertical coordinates of the foot for the calculated breakpoints can be 
obtained as follows: 

-First phase (Mousavi, 2006): 

a , level ground 

(0 = 

H ao 
h„+l 

t = kT c 
t = kT c+ T d 
t = kT c +T m 
t = (k + l)T c 
t = (k + \)T+T d 

-Second phase: 

h +1 

gs an 

h g s + hf sin ^b + L cos #6 

,« = <#„ 

(A ~ ^ ) sin 2 + / flft sin^ + X) + l an cos(q f 
D, sin X + / cos /I 

a, transient V 

■A) 

-Third phase: 

Z> s sin A + l an cos A 
z fl fraw/e „, (0 = s L ao sin X + i7 flo cos A 

(2D s - l ab ) sin A + /^ sin(^ / + A) + / fln cos(^ / + A) 

2Z) y sin X + / fln cos X 
-Fourth phase: 

Dec st D s sinX + l an cos X 

(Dec st D s + / fl/ ) sin X + / a/ sin^ -X) + l m cos(q b -X) 

(Dec st D s + L flo ) sin A + # flo cos A 

((Decst + 2)D s - l ab ) sin 1 + l ab sin(q f + X) + • • • 

/ fln cos^ +/1) 

(Dec st + 2)Z)^ sin A + / fln cos A 

c(0 = 

* = £?; 

t = kT c + T d 
t = kT c + T m 

t = (k + \)T 

t = (k + l)T e +T d 

t = kT 
t = kT+ T d 
t = kT+T m 
t = (k + \)T c 
t = (k + \)T c+ T d 

t = kT c 
t = kT c +T d 
t = kT c +T m 
t = (k + \)T c 

t = (k + l)T c +T d 

(13) 

(14) 

(15) 

(16) 

Mathematical Modelling and Simulation 

of Combined Trajectory Paths of a Seven Link Biped Robot 

171 

-Fifth phase: 

\Dec st + \)D s sin X + l an cos X t = kT c 

((Dec st + \)D s + l af ) sin X + l af sin(^ - X) + l an cos(q b - X) t = kT + T d 

z a , tran . 2 (t) = <((K h -KJD)sinX + H ao t = kT +T m 
((K h ~ k chi) D s ) sin 1 + l ab s\n(q f ) + l an cos(q f ) t = (k + \)T c 

((k ch -k chl )D s )smX + l an t = (k + \)T+T d 

-Six phase: 

\Dec st + 2)D s sin X + l an cos X t = kT 

((Dec st + 2)D s + l af ) sin X + l af s\n(q b - X) + l an cos(q b -X) t = kT c + T d 

*.. tran.2 (0 = ((K h 2 ~ Kkl ) A ) Sin *> + H ao * = ^c + ^ 

((*<* " *e*i ) D s ) sin 1 + / fl , sin^ ) + l an cos(q f ) f = (k + \)T 

((k ch2 - k chl )D s ) sin X + / fln * = (* + \)T + r, 

-Seven phase: 

\(k ch 2-KJD s )smX + l an t 

((Khi ~ Khi ) D s ) sin X + / fl/ sinfe ) + / fln cos(^ ) t 

<((k ch2 -k chl )D s )sinX + H ao t 

(t) = 

a, level 2 ground 

-Eighth phase: 

kT c 

kT c +T d 
kT+T m 
((Kh ~ Kb ) D s ) sin X + l ab sin(^ / ) + l an cos(q f ) t = {k + 1)7 

((K h 2-KJD)smX + l at 

a, stair descending 

(0 = 

-Nine phase: 

a , sto'r , descending 

(*) 

((Kh2 - k chi ) D s ) sin A + / fl/ sin(^, ) + l an cos(q b ) 
((^ 2 -^i)A)sin^ + // fl0 
((^e* " Km ) D s ) sin X + l ab sm(q f ) + l an cos(q f ) + h s 
({k ch2 -k chl )D s )smX + l an +h s 

X(k ch2 -k chl )D s )smX + l m 

(( k c h 2 ~ k chi ) D s ) sin X + / a/ sin(^, ) + l an cos(q b ) 

((^ 2 -^ 1 )D)sinl + // flo 

(( k c h ~ k c h x ) D s ) sin X + l ab sm(q f ) + ■ ■ ■ 

l an cos(q f ) + 2h s 

((k ch2 -k chl )D s )sinX + l an +2h s 

t = kT c 

t = kT c +T d 

t = kT+T m 
t = (k + \)T c 
t = (k + \)T c +T d 

t = kT c 
t = kT c+ T d 
t = kT c +T m 
t = (k + l)T c 

t = (k + l)T c +T d 

(17) 

(18) 

(19) 

(20) 

(21) 

172 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

-Tenth phase: 

((k ch2 -k chl )D s )smX + l m -St cm h s 
(( k chi ~ k chi ) D s ) sin /I + l af sm(q b ) + • • • 
L n ^s(q h ) + St con h s 
(0 = \ ((Ku ~ k M )D s ) sin X - (St con + \)h, + H, 
(( k c h 2 ~ k chi ) D s ) sin 1 + l ab $m(q f ) + ■ • ■ 
/ fln cos(g / ) + (^ con +2)A 5 
WcH2 ~ Kv )D S ) sin X + /„ - (^ + 2)A, 

' = ^c 

f = kT c - 

±T d 

t = kT c 

+ T m 

t = (k 

+ l)T c 

t = {k + \)T c +T d 

(22) 

In all the obtained relations, l a b, laf and l an indicate the foot configuration as displayed in Fig. 
4. H s , h s and St con indicate the stair height, foot's maximum height measured from the stair 
level and the step number of the robot over the stair. The trajectory path of the hip follows 
the above utilized procedure with respect to walking of the robot phases (Mousavi & 
Bagheri, 2007). The applicable constraints of the ankle and hip joints have been discussed in 
(Mousavi & Bagheri, 2007). 

Ph. 4 

Ph. 5 

Ph. 1 

A 

Ph. 2 Ph.3 

Sta. End 

Fig. 3. The swing foot phases during gait. 

'ah 

'af 

Fig. 4. The foot configuration. 

Mathematical Modelling and Simulation 

of Combined Trajectory Paths of a Seven Link Biped Robot 

173 

hip a.Swi. 

a,Sup. hip 

^hip ^a,Sw 

7 — 7 
^hip ^a,sup 

Fig. 5. The link's angles and configuration. 

Now, the kinematic parameters will be obtained with respect to the above mentioned 
combined trajectory paths combined with the domain of the nonlinear equations (see Fig. 5). 
The nonlinear equations can be obtained as follows: 

For support legs: 

/j cos(;z- -6 x ) + l 2 cos(;z- -6 2 ) = a 
l x sin(;z- -0 { ) + l 2 sin(^- -0 2 ) = b 

(23) 

For swing legs: 

/ 3 cos(# 3 ) + / 4 cos(<9 4 ) = c 
/ 3 sin(0 3 ) + / 4 sin(<9 4 ) = d 

(24) 

where 

3~ ^a,sup"^hip 
D - Zhip"Z a ,sup 
C — Xhip"X a ,swing 
Cl — Zhip,Z a ,swing 

With the aid of the written programs and designed software, the above nonlinear equations 
based on the gait parameters are solved and also the link's angles are obtained. The 
kinematic parameters of the robot for single phase of the walking can be found in (Mousavi 
& Bagheri, 2007; Mousavi, 2006) . 

174 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

3. Dynamic investigations 

With the biped's motion an important stability criteria (in similarities to the human gait) is 
defined using the zero moment point (ZMP). The ZMP is a point on the ground about which 
the sum of all the moments around is equal to zero. The ZMP formula is written as follows 
(Huang et al, 2001): 

/ \ m i (g cos X + z. )x. - 2_, m t (g sin A + x t )z i - V l 1.0. 
/ m i (g cos X + z\ ) 

(25) 

where x. , z\ are the vertical and horizontal acceleration of the mass center of link (i) with 
respect to the fixed coordinate system (which is on the support foot). i is the angular 

acceleration of link (i) obtained from the interpolation process and k denotes the slope of the 
surface. Principally, two types of ZMP are defined: (a) moving ZMP and (b) fixed ZMP. 
The moving ZMP of the robot is similar to that for the human gait (Mousavi & Bagheri, 
2007). In the fixed type, the ZMP position is restricted through the support feet or the user's 
selected areas. Consequently, the significant torso's modified motion is required for stable 
walking of the robot. For the process here, the software has been designed to find the target 
angle of the torso for providing the fixed ZMP position automatically. In the designed 
software, ^ to rso shows the deflection angle of the torso determined by the user or calculated 
by the auto detector module of the software. Note that in the auto detector, the torso's 
motion needed for obtaining the mentioned fixed ZMP will be extracted with respect to the 
desired ranges. The desired ranges include the defined support feet area by the users or is 
determined automatically by the designed software. Note that the most affecting parameters 
for obtaining the robot's stable walking are the hip's height and position. By varying the 
parameters with an iterative method for x e d, x s d (Huang et al., 2001) and choosing the 
optimum hip height, the robot control process with respect to the torso's modified angles 
and the mentioned parameters can be performed. To obtain the joint's actuator torques, 
Lagrange equations (John, 1989) have been used at the single support phase as follows: 
r^HiqYq + Ciq^^q + Giq,), 

where i = 0, 2, . . ., 6 and H, C, G are mass inertia, coriolis and gravitational matrices of the 
system which can be written as follows: 

H(q)-- 

n \\ 

n \2 

n n 

n \A 

n \5 

n \b 

n \i 

Kx 

h 22 

h 23 

K 

h 25 

K 

h 21 

K 

h 32 

h 33 

K 

h 35 

K 

h 37 

K 

h 42 

K 

K 

K 

Ke 

K 

K 

h 52 

h 53 

K 

h 55 

h 56 

K 

K 

K 

Kk 

Ka 

K 

K, 

K 

C(q,q)- 

c \\ c n c n c u c i5 c i6 c r, 

C 2\ C 22 C 23 C 2\ C 25 C 26 C 2', 

C 31 C 32 C 33 C 34 C 35 C 36 C Y, 

C A\ C A,2 C 43 C 44 C 45 C 46 C 4', 

C 51 C 52 C 53 C 54 C 55 C 56 C 5', 

*^£t ^cn ^f.i ^(.a £.-£<; C/;/- L,{~ 

l ^62 

l - 63 

l ~ 64 

l - 65 

l - 66 

Mathematical Modelling and Simulation 

of Combined Trajectory Paths of a Seven Link Biped Robot 

175 

G(q)-- 

G 2 

G 4 
G, 

The most important point of the double support phase signifies the occurrence of the impact 
between the swing leg and the ground. Due to presence of the reaction force of the ground, 
Newton's equations must be employed for determination of the reaction force applied 
through the double support phase ((Huang et aL, 2001; Lum et aL, 1999; Eric, 2003). The 
method of (Huang et aL, 2001) for simulation of the ground reaction force has been used for 
the inverse dynamics. Now, we have chosen an impeccable method involved slight 
deviations for dynamical analysis of the robot included the Lagrangian and Newtonian 
relations. The components of the matrices are complex and the detailed mathematical 
relations can be found in (Mousavi, 2006). 

hh 

In 

ho 

L 

lab 

laf 

0.3m 

0.3m 

0.3m 

0.1m 

0.1m 

0.13m 

m sh 

5.7kg 

rriTh 
10kg 

m To 
43kg 

m Fo 
3.3kg 

A 
0.5m 

0.9s 

0.18s 

0.4s 

H ao 
0.16m 

Lao 

0.4m 

X e d 

0.23m 

X s d 

0.23m 

1 shank 

0.02kgm 2 

ggf 

fl inin 

0.60m 

-'tight 

0.08kgm 2 

H max 
0.62m 

K 
0.1m 

horso 

1.4kgm 2 

0.15m 

Ifoot 

O.Olkgm 2 

k C h 

kchi 

k C h2 

2 

5 

7 

Table 1. The simulated robot specifications 

The following conditions must be applied during the simulation process: 

if k < k chl and k = k ch2 +1 A = 

if k > k chl and k < k ch2 +1 X = The user defined value 

Dec st the number of robot's steps over the slope 

kch the number of steps that the robot changes during the walking process from the 

ground to slope 

kchi the number of steps that the robot changes during the walking process from slope 

to the ground 

kchi the number of steps that the robot changes during the walking process from the 

ground to stair 

The ranges of the fixed ZMP are selected with respect to the descending and ascending 

surfaces respectively as follows: 

-0.05m < X zmp < 0.26 

-0Am<X zmp <0.26 

176 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

(a) Stick Diagram 

(b) Link's angles 

Links Mass center mcrtral fc 

7*7 

Time(s) 

(c) ZMP 

(d) Inertial Forces 

swl. srianK Joint 

-■-■■ Swi. hip joint 
■■■■■■ Supp. hiipjoiiiL 

^:^ r /...^-^,^ :r ^Y 

Supp. ankle an 

i shank jon its torque 

1 Supp ankle join, 

| Supp shank Joint | 

•MO 

.,00 

A 

SCO 

t- 

■A 

* L 

\if 

\ *-'' 

^s,.,.'-^.„ 

- — -x/\ | 

100 

A VI 

-:>cj) 

(e) The link's actuator torques 

(f) The link's actuator torques 

Fig. 6. (a) The robot's stick diagram on X= 8°, moving ZMP, Hmm = 0.60 m, H max = 0.62 m; (b) 
the Link's angles during combined trajectory paths; (c) the moving ZMP diagram in nominal 

gait which satisfies stability criteria; (d) Inertial forces: ( — ) supp. thigh, ( ) supp. shank, 

(...) swing thigh, ( ) swing shank; (e) joint's torques: ( — ) swing shank joint, ( ) swing 

ankle joint, (...) supp. hip joint, ( ) swing hip joint; (f) joint's torques: (-) supp. Ankle 

joint, ( ) supp. shank joint. 

Mathematical Modelling and Simulation 

of Combined Trajectory Paths of a Seven Link Biped Robot 

177 

- Xzrnp | 

(a) Stick Diagram 

(b) Link's angles 

20C 

Links Mass center inertial forces 

150 

— — Supp shank 

Supp. tight 

3wi shank 

100 
50 

i\ 

/ | 

-50 
-100 

^:> > ""^^7^" H ":::- T '" = '"^:; -^-.-^ — "kv--^'""? 

\? s O^^-i 

-150 

i 

Timers) 

(c) ZMP 

BO 

/\ 

•' """"'■"-, -* ■"*'%, /? \ s H 

— Swi. ankle joint 

Swi shank joint 

Swi hipjoirtt 

Supp. hip joinl | 

ISO 
40 
20 
M 
20 
40 
■60 
-BO 

\ i \ 

i ... V i "' : 

(d) Inertial Forces 

Supp. ankle and shank jon its torque 

- Supp. airkle juinl 

(e) The link's actuator torques 

(f) The link's actuator torques 

Fig. 7. (a) The robot's stick diagram on X= 8°, moving ZMP, H m ; n = 0.5 m, H max = 0.52 m. (b) 
The Link's angles during combined trajectory paths, (c) The moving ZMP diagram in 

nominal gait which satisfies stability criteria, (d) Inertial forces: ( — ) supp. thigh, ( ) supp. 

shank, (...) swing thigh, ( ) swing shank, (e) Joint's torques ( — ) swing shank joint, ( ) 

swing ankle joint, (...) supp. hip joint, ( ) swing hip joint, (f) Joint's torques: ( — ) supp. 

ankle joint, ( ) supp. shank joint. 

178 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

(a) Stick Diagram 

Torso Deflection due to Z MP auto detector =-51.5662 

Time(s) 

(c) ZMP 

I CO 

swl, sriann joint 

-- Swl NpjoJnl 
Suet-, hie ioii i. 

:u 

- ,\ 

i \f* 

i on 

(e) The link's actuator torques 

(b) Link's angles 

Links Masscen 

er inertial forces 

150 

Supp. tight 

--■ Swi shank 
0*i. tight 

i ,;io 

: . - 

«, 

, n 

• 1 

A ,... 

/"""— ''"" 

*"% »' i 

1 UO 
150 

j**v . : i 

a » 

(d) Inertial Forces 

inkle and shank jc 

1—5 

(f) The link's actuator torques 

Fig. 8. (a) The robot's stick diagram on X= 8°, fixed ZMP, H min = 0.6 m, H max = 0.62 m. (b) The 
Link's angles during combined trajectory paths, (c) The fixed ZMP diagram in nominal gait 

which satisfies stability criteria, (d) Inertial forces: ( — ) supp. thigh, ( ) supp. shank, (...) 

swing thigh, ( ) swing shank, (e) Joint's torques ( — ) swing shank joint, ( ) swing ankle 

joint, (...) supp. hip joint, ( ) swing hip joint, (f) Joint's torques: ( — ) supp. ankle joint, 

( ) supp. shank joint. 

Mathematical Modelling and Simulation 

of Combined Trajectory Paths of a Seven Link Biped Robot 

179 

(a) Stick Diagram 

(b) Link's angles 

!-!<:•. Vi.i:::", :•■ .'■?'. <C- ■■r'tigl 'q'.-.:;-; 

' If 

(c) ZMP 

1 2 3 

5 6 

8 9 

(d) Inert ial Forces 

Supp an 

kleandshan 

k jonits torque 

aoo 

1 Supp. ankle joint 1 

| Supp. shank joint |_ 

400 

-'\ 

r 

?00 

V 

^ 

/"\ 

\_-'"" 

~~ 

VI 

"00 

(e) The link's actuator torques 

Tirne(s) 

(f) The link's actuator torques 

Fig. 9. (a) The robot's stick diagram on X= -10°, moving ZMP, H m ; n = 0.6 m, H max = 0.62 m. (b) 
The Link's angles during combined trajectory paths, (c) The moving ZMP diagram in 

nominal gait which satisfies stability criteria, (d) Inertial forces: ( — ) supp. tight, ( ) supp. 

shank, (...) swing thigh, ( ) swing shank, (e) Joint's torques: ( — ) swing shank joint, ( ) 

swing ankle joint, (...) supp. hip joint, ( ) swing hip joint, (f) Joint's torques: ( — ) supp. 

ankle joint, ( ) supp. shank joint. 

180 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

(a) Stick Diagram 

(b) Link's angles 

umo moss center inertial forces 

| — Xzmp 

Torso Deflection due to ZMP auto detector =-34.3775 20 ° 

- Supp. shanl 
■ .T™ shank 

m- 

y 

(c) ZMP 

Jonits torque 

7 S 

3 + 

Tirne(s) 

(d) Inertial Forces 

Supp. ankle and shank jonits torque 

jjV)(Yc>c> 

™ Swi. ankl* Mill 
- — SwL nip join! 

:2:::' r :Z 

A ft i 

1 Supp ankle joint 1 

| Supp. shank jolnl [ 

ft 

v 

1 \ 

\/ 

^ 

"^"w_j*^™v y^\ I v*\ 

(e) The link's actuator torques 

(f) The link's actuator torques 

Fig. 10. (a) The robot's stick diagram on A= -10°, moving ZMP, H m i n = 0.6 m, H max = 0.62 m. 
(b) The Link's angles during combined trajectory paths, (c) The fixed ZMP diagram in 

nominal gait which satisfies stability criteria, (d) Inertial forces: ( — ) supp. thigh, ( ) supp. 

shank, (...) swing thigh, ( ) swing shank, (e) Joint's torques: ( — ) swing shank joint, ( ) 

swing ankle joint, (...) supp. hip joint, ( ) swing hip joint, (f) Joint's torques: ( — ) supp. 

ankle joint, ( ) supp. shank joint. 

Mathematical Modelling and Simulation 

of Combined Trajectory Paths of a Seven Link Biped Robot 

181 

(a) Stick Diagram 

Xzmp | 

Torso Deflection due to ZMP auto detector =-40.107 

Time{s) 

(c) ZMP 

Jomts torque 

/ ; 

— Swi anfcfe joint 

Swi shank -i'.' 

Swi. hip joint 

Supp. hip join! 

1 00 

'- = 

A 

50 

7W- 

■'"-~-— « --.... 

y * * 

w \J|4J 

-50 

\ \* 

V 

(e) The link's actuator torques 

(b) Link's angles 

300 
250 

Links Mass center inertial forces 

Supp. shanlf 

— Supp tight 

- - Swi srianh 
Swi tight 

200 

' SO 

I | 

i/-AL 

w^^Ii 

50 

1 'C 

.-' '■> 

**'' "" V ""' Xw* 

i 

i ,' 

50 

V 

(d) Inertial Forces 

Supp. ankle 

arid^iarikjumLsLorque 

— Su^P- "hank Sir* 

ft 

/ 

\r-~--~~ 

a\ ''/ 

V / 

1 

2 3 1 

5 6 7 6 9 

(f) The link's actuator torques 

Fig. 11. (a) The robot's stick diagram on X= -10°, fixed ZMP, H min = 0.5 m, H max = 0.52 m. (b) 
The Link's angles during combined trajectory paths, (c) The fixed ZMP diagram in nominal 

gait which satisfies stability criteria, (d) Inertial forces: ( — ) supp. thigh, ( ) supp. shank, 

(...) swing thigh, ( ) swing shank, (e) Joint's torques: ( — ) swing shank joint, ( ) swing 

ankle joint, (...) supp. hip joint, ( ) swing hip joint, (f) Joint's torques: ( — ) supp. ankle 

joint, ( ) supp. shank joint. 

182 Climbing and Walking Robots 

In the designed software, these methods are used to simulate the robot including AVI 
(audio and video interface) files for each identified condition by the users. Differentiating 
and also using the mathematical methods in the program, the angular velocities and 
accelerations of the robot's links are calculated to use in the ZMP, Lagrangian and 
Newtonian equations Table 1. 

4. Simulation results 

For the described process, the software has been designed based on the cited mathematical 
methods for simulation of a seven link biped robot. Because of the very high precision of 
third-order spline method, this method has been applied to calculate the trajectory paths of 
the robot. The result is 14,000 lines of program in the MATLAB/SIMULINK environment 
for simulation and stability analysis of the biped robot. By choosing the type of the ZMP in 
the Fixed and Moving modes, stability analysis of the robot can be judged easily. For the 
fixed type of ZMP, the torso's modified motion has been regarded to be identical with 
respect to various phases of the robot's motion. The results have been displayed in Figs. 6- 
11. Figs. 6-8 present the combined trajectory paths for nominal and non-nominal (with 
changed hip heights from nominal values) walking of the robot over ascending surfaces. 
Figs. 9-11 present the same types of walking process over descending surfaces. Both ZMPs 
have been displayed and their effects on the joint's actuator torques are presented. The 
impact of swing leg and the ground has been included in the designed software (Huang et 
al., 2001; Lum et al, 1999; Hon et al, 1978). 

5. Conclusion 

In this chapter, simulation of combined trajectory paths of a seven link biped robot over 
various surfaces has been presented. We have focused on generation of combined trajectory 
paths with the aid of mathematical interpolation. The inverse kinematic and dynamic 
methods have implemented for providing the robot combined trajectory paths in order to 
obtain a smooth motion of the robot. This procedure avoids the link's velocity 
discontinuities of the robot in order to mitigate the occurrence of impact effects and also 
helps to obtain a suitable control process. The sagittal movement of the robot has been 
investigated while 3D simulations of the robot are presented. From the presented 
simulations, one can observe important parameters of the robot with respect to stability 
treatment and optimum driver torques. The most important factor is the hip height 
measured from the fixed coordinate system. As can be seen from Fig. 7f, the support knee 
needs more actuator torque than the value of the non-nominal gait (with lower hip height 
measured from the fixed coordinate system). This point can be seen in Figs. 8f and lOf. This 
is due to the robot's need to bend its knee joint more at a lower hip position. The role of the 
hip height is considerable over the torso's modified motion for obtaining the desired fixed 
ZMP position. With respect to Figs. 10c and lie, the robot with the lower hip height needs 
more modified motion of its torso to satisfy the defined ranges of ZMP by the users. The 
magnitude of the torso's modified motion has drastic effects upon the control process of the 
robot. Assuming control process of an inverse pendulum included a stagnant origin will 
present relatively sophisticated control process for substantial deflection angle of pendulum. 
Note that the torso motion in a biped (as an inverted pendulum) includes both the rotational 

Mathematical Modelling and Simulation 

of Combined Trajectory Paths of a Seven Link Biped Robot 183 

and translational movements which will complicate the process of control. Consequently, 
the lower torso's modified motion is desirable which can be derived from the higher hip 
height. Therefore, the hip height plays an important role in both the stability and optimum 
actuator torques of the joints. Meanwhile, the higher hip height will avoid the link's velocity 
discontinuities. 

6. References 

Bagheri, A. & Mousavi, P. N. (2007). Dynamic Simulation of Single and Combined 

Trajectory Path Generation and Control of A Seven Link Biped Robot, In: Humanoid 

Robots New Developments, Armando Carlos de Pina Filho, (Ed.), 89-120, Advanced 

Robotics Systems International and I-Tech, ISBN 978-3-902613-00-4, Vienna Austria. 
Chevallereau, C; Formal' sky, A. & Perrin, B. (1998). Low Energy Cost Reference Trajectories 

for a Biped Robot, in: Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation, 1998, pp. 

1398-1404. 
Dasgupta, A. & Nakamura, Y. (1999). Making Feasible Walking Motion of Humanoid 

Robots from Human Motion Capture Data, in: Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and 

Automation, pp. 1044-1049. 
Hirai, K; Hirose, M.; Haikawa, Y. & Takenaka, T. (1998). The Development of Honda 

Humanoid Robot, in: Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation, pp. 1321- 

1326. 
Huang, Q.; Yokoi, K.; Kajita, S.; Kaneko, K.; Arai, H.; Koyachi, N. & Tanie, K. (2001). 

Planning Walking Patterns For A Biped Robot, IEEE Trans. Robot. Automat. 17 (3). 
Hon, H.; Kim, T. & Park, T. (1978). Tolerance Analysis of a Spur Gear Train, in: Proc. Third 

DADS Korean User's Conf, pp. 61-81. 
John, J. G. (1989) Introduction to Robotics: Mechanics and Control, Addison-Wesley. 
Lum, H. K.; Zribi, M. & Soh, Y. C. (1999). Planning and Contact of A Biped Robot, Int. ]. Eng. 

Sci. 37 -1319-1349. 
McGeer, T. (1990). Passive walking with knees, in: Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and 

Automation, pp. 1640-1645. 
Mousavi, P. N. (2006). Adaptive Control of 5 DOF Biped Robot Moving on a Declined 

Surface, M.S. Thesis, Guilan University. 
Mousavi, P. N. & Bagheri, A. (2007). Mathematical Simulation of A Seven Link Biped Robot 

on Various Surfaces and ZMP Considerations, Applied Mathematical Modelling, vol. 

31/1, Elsevier, pp. 18-37. 
Shih, C. L; Li, Y. Z.; Churng, S.; Lee, T. T. & Cruver, W. A. (1990). Trajectory Synthesis And 

Physical Admissibility For A Biped Robot During The Single Support Phase, in: 

Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation, pp. 1646-1652. 
Shih, C. (1997). Gait Synthesis For A Biped Robot, Robotica, 15, 599-607. 
Shih, C. L. (1999). Ascending And Descending Stairs For A Biped Robot, IEEE Trans. Syst. 

Man. Cybern. A 29 (3) 255-268. 
Silva, F.M. & Machado, J. A. T. (1999). Energy Analysis during Biped Walking, in: Proc. IEEE 

Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation, pp. 59-64. 
Takanishi, A.; Ishida, M.; Yamazaki, Y. & Kato, I. (1985). The Realization of Dynamic 

Walking Robot WL-10RD, in: Proc. Int. Conf. Advanced Robotics, pp. 459-466. 

184 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Westervelt, E. R. (2003). Toward A Coherent Framework for the Control of Plannar Biped 
Locomotion, A Dissertation Submitted in Partial Fulfilment of the Requirements for 
the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy, (Electrical Engineering Systems), the 
University of Michigan. 

Zarrugh, M. Y. & Radcliffe, C.W. (1979). Computer Generation of Human Gait Kinematics, /. 
Biomech. 12, 99-111. 

Zheng, Y. F. & Shen, J. (1990). Gait Synthesis for the SD-2 Biped Robot to Climb Sloping 
Surface, IEEE Trans. Robot. Automat. 6, 86-96. 

11 

Bipedal Walking Control based on the 

Assumption of the Point-contact: 

Sagittal Motion Control and Stabilization 

Tadayoshi Aoyama 1 , Kosuke Sekiyama 1 , 
Yasuhisa Hasegawa 2 and Toshio Fukuda 1 

1 Nagoya University, 2 University ofTsukuba 

Japan 

1. Introduction 

In the age of an aging society, the prospective role of robots is turning gradually from just 
working machines to do monotonous work in a factories to partners who support human life. 
In recent years, a lot of autonomous humanoid robots have been actually realized (Hirai et al. 
(1998); Kaneko et al. (2008)). These robots can walk on two legs stably by means of the control 
based on ZMP (Zero Moment Point). ZMP (Vukobratovic & Borovac (2004)), the indicator 
of the stability of biped walking, is a point on the floor where the torque generated by both 
inertial and gravitational forces becomes zero. That is, using ZMP-based control to realize 
stable walking makes sense, thus a number of researches of ZMP-based control have been 
presented (Nishiwaki et al. (2002); Takanishi et al. (1985)). However, in terms of the practical 
use of humanoid robots, these controllers based on ZMP have a problem in terms of the run- 
time of the battery since ZMP-based method does not take advantage of the robot inherent 
dynamics. 

In order to achieve natural and energy efficient biped walking, many control methods based 
on robot dynamics had been proposed up to this day. As one of such methods, some re- 
searchers presented the control methods to take advantage of robot dynamics directly by use 
of point-contact state between a robot and the ground (Furusho & Sano (1990); Goswami et 
al. (1997); Grishin et al. (1994); Kuo (1999); Nakanishi et al. (2004); Ono et al. (2004)). Miura et 
al. produced the point-contact biped robot like stilt and realize dynamic walking by means of 
stabilizing control to change the configuration at foot-contact (Miura & Shimoyama (1984)). 
Kajita et al. proposed the control and stabilizing method based on the conserved quan- 
tity derived by designing the COG trajectory parallel to the ground (Kajita et al. (1992)). 
Chevallereau presented the control to converge robot dynamics on optical trajectory by intro- 
ducing the virtual time (Chevallereau (2003)). Grizzle and Westervelt et al. built the controller 
by use of the virtual holonomi constraint of joints named virtual constraint realize stable dy- 
namic walking by means of the biped robot with a torso (Grizzle et al. (2001); Westervelt et al. 
(2004)). 

As one of point-contact methods, Doi et al. proposed Passive Dynamic Autonomous Con- 
trol (PDAC) previously (Doi et al. (2004b)). PDAC expresses the robot dynamics as an one- 
dimensional autonomous system based on the two concepts: 1) point-contact 2) virtual con- 

186 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 1. Mechanical model of the serial n-link rigid robot. 6j and t 7 - are the angle and the 
torque of z'th joint respectively. ra z - and Jj are the mass and the moment of inertia of zth link 
respectively. 

straint (proposed by Grizzle and Westervelt et al. (Grizzle et al. (2001); Westervelt et al. 
(2004))). In this chapter, we design the sagittal motion controller by applying PDAC to sagittal 
motion. In addition, we find the convergence domain of the proposed controller and prove 
the stability by the Liapunov Theory. Finally, 3-D dynamic walking based on the robot inher- 
ent dynamics is realized by coupling the sagittal motion proposed in this chapter and lateral 
motion proposed previously (Doi et al. (2004a)). 

2. Passive Dynamic Autonomous Control 

2.1 Converged dynamics 

As mentioned previously, PDAC is base on the two concepts, i.e. point-contact and virtual 
constraint. Point-contact denotes that a robot contacts the ground at a point, that is, the first 
joint is passive, virtual constraint was defined by Grizzle and Westervelt et al. (Grizzle et al. 
(2001); Westervelt et al. (2004)) as a set of holonomic constraints on the robot's actuated DoF 
parameterized by the robot's unactuated DoF. Assuming that PDAC is applied to the serial 
n-link rigid robot shown in Fig. 1, these two premises are expressed as follows: 

Tl = 0, (1) 

e = [0!,e 2 , • • • M T = lA(e),f 2 (e),-- ■ ,fn(e)] T 

~ f(9), (2) 

where 6 is the angle around the contact point in the absolute coordinate system, that is, 9\ = 

The dynamic equations of this model are given by 

|(M(e)e)-lA(e T M(e)e)-G(e) = r, p) 

where M(0) := [m 1 (e) T ,m 2 (e) T , • • • ,m„(0) T ] T , := [e 1 ,6 2 ,--- ,8n] T , 

G(0) := [G 1 (0),G 2 (0), • • • ,G„(0)] T , r := [ Tl/ T 2 ,- • • ,t„] t , ^ = [J-, J-, • • • , £-]*. 

Bipedal Walking Control based on the 

Assumption of the Point-contact: Sagittal Motion Control and Stabilization 187 

Since in this model the dynamic equation around the contact point has no term of the Coriolis 
force, it is given as 

|(m 1 (e) T e)-G 1 (e) = r 1 . (4) 

By differentiating Eq. (2) with respect to time, the following equation is acquired, 

* = T< 

a/i(0) a/ 2 (0) df n (o) 

iT 

Substituting Eqs. (1), (2), and (5) into Eq. (3) yields the following dynamic equation, 

d 

(5) 

dt (M(0)6) = G(6), (6) 

where 

M(9) := mi (f(0)) Td -^f (7) 

G(6) := Ga(/(0)). (8) 

By multiplying both sides of Eq. (6) by M(0)0 and integrating with respect to time, the dy- 
namics around the contact point is obtained as follows: 

f (M(O)O) j (M(0)0) dt= f M(0)G(0)0 dt (9) 

^^ ~(M(0)d\ = I M(0)G{9) dO. (10) 

1 

M(0) 

-Jl f M(0)G(0)dO 

1 
M(6) 

HO). 

-y/2(D(0)+C) 

Therefore, the whole robot dynamics is expressed as the following one-dimensional au- 
tonomous system (that is, the phase around contact point), 

(11) 

(12) 
(13) 
In this chapter, we term Eqs. (12) and (13) Converged dynamics. 

2.2 PDAC Constant 

Since Converged dynamics is autonomous, in addition, independent of time, it is considered 
as a conservative system. The integral constant in right side of Eq. (10), C, is a conserved 
quantity, which is termed PDAC Constant. Its value is decided according to the initial condi- 
tion (as for biped walking, the state just after foot-contact), and kept constant during a cycle 
of motion. Thus, it is possible to stabilize the motion by keeping PDAC Constant at certain 
value. 

The dimension of PDAC Constant is equal to the square of angular momentum and has rel- 
evance to it. As is well know, assuming that the robot shown in Fig. 1 is placed on its 
side, the angular momentum around contact point is conserved since there is no effect of 

188 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

gravitational force on the robot dynamics. In this condition, it is clear that M(0) ^(angular 
momentum)^ y/2C from Eq. (12), since G(0) = in Eq. (3) hence D(0) = 0. Note that, 
although angular momentum is not conserved in the condition which robot dynamics is af- 
fected by the gravitational force, PDAC Constant is conserved since it includes the effects of 
the gravitation. This chapter demonstrates the convergence of PDAC Constant by the Lya- 
punov theory and proves the stability of walking. 

3. 3D biped walking 

In this section, control architecture of 3-D biped walking is summarize. 

3.1 Sagittal motion 
3.1.1 3-link model 

For the sake of simplicity, in this chapter upper body of a robot is not moved, hence the 3-link 
model as shown in Fig. 2 is employed. The dynamic equation of this model is described as 
Eq. (3) and that of the ankle joint of the stance leg is Eq. (4) where n = 3. The left-hand side of 
Eq. (4) is described as follows: 

Mn(e) 

M 12 (0) 

M 13 (0) 

Gi(0) 

Jl + h + /3 + TWl^i + ^2^1 + ^2^2 — 2m2#2^1 cos #2 

+m 3 l\ + m 3 al + 2m 3 a 3 l 1 cos(j - 3 ), 

— Jl — ^2^2 + ^2 a 2h cos #2/ 

-J 3 - m 3 al - m 3 a 3 li cos(7 - 3 ), 
(mi«i + wt2/i + m3/i)^sin^ 1 + m2gci2sin(62 — 6\) 
+m 3 ga 3 sin^ + y - 6 3 ), 

where mi(G) = [Mn(0),Mi2(0),Mi 3 (0)]. 

Fig. 2. 3-link model in the sagittal plane. m z -, ]{, l{ and Uj are the mass, the moment of inertia, 
the length of link and the distance from the joint to the link COG of link i respectively. 7 is 
the angle of the forward tilting. In the right figure, Q\, 62 and 3 are the ankle angle of the 
stance leg, the angle from the stance leg to the the swing leg, the angle to swing the trunk up 
respectively. 

Bipedal Walking Control based on the 

Assumption of the Point-contact: Sagittal Motion Control and Stabilization 189 

3.1.2 Constraints of sagittal joints 

Constraints are simply designed as follows: 

• The angle of the torso is constant. 

• The swing leg is symmetrical to the stance leg. 
That is, 

e l 

= MO) 

02 

= fi(0) 

03 

= MO) 

Eqs. (14)-(16) and (1), Eq. (6) is 

M s (0) -- 

~- h- 

~h + m v 

a\ + m 2 l\ ■ 

6, (14) 

26, and (15) 

6. (16) 

„2 , _ 7 2 

:= E 1 + E 2 cos(7-0), (17) 

G s (0) = (m\d\ + m^lx + m^a^ + m^l\)g%ir\Q + m^ga^sm.^ 

:= E 3 + E 4 sin6. (18) 

Thus, 

/ 

M s (0)G s (0)d0 

Ej + E 2 cos(7 - 0)) (E 3 + E 4 sin0)d0 

/« 

+E2E3 sin(0 — 7) — E] E4 cos + C s 
:= D s (0) + C s , (19) 

where C s is the integral constant, which is PDAC Constant of the sagittal motion. From Eq. 
(12), Converged dynamics in the sagittal plane is 

Ms(e)V 2(D s W + Q) (20) 

:= F s (0). (21) 

Note that it is necessary that 7 is decided so that M s (9) > in order to avoid singular point. 
Generally speaking, as for humanoid robots and biped robots, Ei > E2 since l\ > a$. Thus, 
we assume M s (0) > below. 

3.1.3 Foot-contact model 

Regarding foot-contact, it is assumed that the ground is perfectly inelastic collision and oc- 
curred for a moment similarly to previous works (Goswami et al. (1997); Grizzle et al. (2001); 
Kuo (1999); Westervelt et al. (2004)). That is, the angular momentum around the contact point 
is conserved before and after foot-contact. 

Fig. 3 shows the angle and length of the inverted pendulum at foot-contact. Here, consider the 
foot-contact at the end of kth step, i.e. at the beginning of k + 1th step. Denoting the angular 

190 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 3. Parameters at foot-contact. l e [k] and g e [k] are the length and inclination of the inverted 
pendulum which connects the ankle of support leg and robot COG before impact at the end of 
kth step. lj[k + 1] and £ z -[fc + 1] are those after impact. 6 e [k] and 6j[k + 1] are the angles around 
the contact point before and after impact. 

velocity of ankle joint of the rear leg at foot-contact as 9 e [k], the following equation is derived 
from Eq. (12): 

elk] 

M s (O e [k\) 

2(D a {0e[k]) + C 8 [k]), 

(22) 

where C s [k] denotes PDAC Constant of kth step. 

Since the torso angle is constant and COG is not rotated, the angular velocity of ankle joint of 

the fore leg at foot-contact, P 7 - [k + 1], is described as follows: 

m t l e [k]li[k + l]6 e [k] COB(Se[k] + &[k + 1]) 

m t le[k]li[k+i\cos(Se[k] + Si[k+i\) I ( . r ,. r n 
— M ^2(D s (e e [k])+C s [k]) 

Ms(6 e [k]) 

Pi[k + 1] 

:= h[k]^2(D s (6 e [k]) + C s [k]), 

where m.f = m\ + m-i + m^. 

Since the angular velocity around the passive joint is 

p = M s (0)e, 

PDAC Constant after foot-contact, C s [k + 1], is represented as 

(23) 

c s [fc + i] = -p,.[fc + i] 2 -D s (e,-[fc]) 

= h[k] 2 C s [k] + h[k} 2 D s (9 e [k}) - D s (9i[k}) 
:= Sl [k]C s [k]+s 2 [k]. 

(24) 

Bipedal Walking Control based on the 

Assumption of the Point-contact: Sagittal Motion Control and Stabilization 

191 

3.1.4 Sagittal motion period 

In order to satisfy the condition of constant step-length, it is necessary to control the lateral 
motion so that lateral foot-contact period matches sagittal one. Since sagittal dynamics is 
expressed as an one-dimensional autonomous dynamics, it is possible to calculate the sagittal 
foot-contact period by integrating sagittal Converged dynamics with time as follows: 

f 

J ,6+ 

0+ F s (6) 

cL0. 

(25) 

In next section, we design the lateral motion and build the controller satisfying the synchro- 
nization between lateral and sagittal motion. 

3.2 Lateral motion control 
3.2.1 Lateral motion 

In this section, the lateral motion is composed by means of PDAC. In phase(A), a robot starts to 
turn over toward its swing-leg-side and is accelerated by gravitation from the tilting position 
at a standstill on the stance-leg-side to foot-contact. In phase(B), after foot-contact, a robot is 
got up toward the tilting position at a standstill by the energy obtained in phase(A). 

-Left Foot Contact 

Right-Leg-Support <■ 

>• Left-Leg-Support 

Fig. 4. The lateral motion of lateral-based walk (front view). The inverted pendulum falls off 
in phase(A) and swing up in phase(B) 

192 Climbing and Walking Robots 

3.2.2 Constraint of lateral joints 

The dynamic equation of an inverted pendulum is described as follows: 

— {(mi 1 + ])<£} = mgl sin (p. (26) 

Multiplying both side of this equation by (ml 2 + J)<p and integrating with respect to time 
yields the following equations, 

((ml 2 + J)<j>) -n((ml 2 + J)(p) = mgl(ml 2 + J)(psin(p 

^=> - ((ml 2 + J)(p) 2 =f mgl(ml 2 + J)(psin(p dt 

<=><P= -^—^2 j 'mgl(ml 2 + J)(j) sin $ dt. (27) 

Here, we decide the virtual constraint, that is, pendulum length I is described as the function 
of (p. It is clear that the right side of Eq. (27) can be integrated if f((p) is a polynomial equation. 
Thus in this chapter, f((p) is decided as follows: 

I = f(cp) (28) 

= acp 2 + b(p + c, (29) 

where a, b, and c are determined so as to satisfy the conditions described below. At first, 
the conditions of pendulum length at the beginning and ending of phase(A) and phase(B) 
introduce the following four equations: 

f A (4>o) = k, (30) 

f A (<p 1 ) = lo + M, (31) 

f B (-<p 2 )=k-M, (32) 

f B (-<p3) = k, (33) 

where upper-suffixes denote the differentiation of phases. 

In addition, the pendulum motion is designed so that the angular velocity of robot joints is 

not discontinuous, that is, the velocity along pendulum is zero, 

^-(fr) = 0, and (34) 

£(-*)= 0. (35) 

From Eq. (30)-(35), a and b, c in each phase are decided. 

Finally, the phase around contact point (phase of passive joint) is obtained from Eqs. (27) and 

(28) as follows: 

* = OT /(/)2 + / V 2 J mgf ^ ( m ^ )2 + J ) Sin ^ 

F(<p). (36) 

Bipedal Walking Control based on the 

Assumption of the Point-contact: Sagittal Motion Control and Stabilization 193 

Lastly, the value to lift up pelvis, A/, is determined. Al is necessary to be decided so that Eq. 
(36) satisfies the initial condition of phase(A) and the end condition of phase(B), that is, 

nA 

F t A (cpo)=Ff(-cp 3 )=0 

COS(^i + (p 2 ) 

(37) 

where upper suffixes denote the differentiation of phases. Al is so small that it is possible to 
find the appropriate value satisfying Eq. (37) by use of the quadratic approximation. 

3.2.3 Control of lateral period 

Next we design the period controller of the lateral motion described in the previous subsec- 
tion. The period of lateral motion is decided by the amplitude of pendulum motion, that is, 
the period is long if the amplitude is large and it is short if the amplitude is small. In this 
chapter, the desired period is realized by controlling the lateral amplitude. 
Assuming that the pendulum angle at the transition from phase(B) to phase(A) is fa, the 
motion period T can be found properly by the following calculation 

/ F7^ + / F7^ = T - (38) 

J-<p3 FbW) J<Ps Fa(<P) 

However, it is not easy to solve this equation for <p$. The pendulum extension is so small that 
the desired amplitude is decided approximately by use of the model of inverted pendulum, 
length of which is not variable, as follows: 

** = flYT\' (39) 

where, (p c is the pendulum angle in the standing posture, i.e. the pendulum angle at the foot- 
contact under the condition of Al = 0. 

4. Stability proof of the sagittal motion 

4.1 Constraint of constant step-length 

In this work, the step-length is fixed at constant value in order to stabilize walking. Under 
such condition, it is clear that the following is held: 

0e\j\ = -0i[j] = arcsin (JA := 6 C = const., (40) 

where jGN and < 6 C < j. Since the torso angle, 7, is kept constant, £ e [/] and & [/'], l e [/'], lj [7] 
are also all constant similarly. Hence, in Eq. (23), 

h\j] := H = const. 

is held. Besides, in Eq. (24), 

s l[/1 = h[j} 2 = H 2 := S x = const 
s 2 [j] = h\jfD s (9 e \j]) - DsiOilJl) 

= H 2 D S (6 C ) - D 8 (-0 C ) := S 2 = const. 

194 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

are also held. 

4.2 Requisite to perform walking continuously 

We consider the requisite to generate walking. In terms of practicality, let 7 be < 7 < j.ln 
order to perform walking continuously, 6 > is required at all times. Considering M s (6) > 0, 
this condition is equivalent to P = M s (6)6 > 0. Since 

dDs(O) 

de 

M s (0)G s (0) 

(El + E 2 cos(7 - 0)) (£3 + £4 sin 6) 

and also since £3 > and £4 > 0, in can be seen that D s (6) i.e. the angular velocity of passive 
joint, P, is minimum when 

£ 4 

and that it decreases monotonically on — j < < and increases monotonically on 6 < < 
j. Since \P 2 = D s (0) + C s , the condition discussed above, P > 0, is described as below, 

P>0^C s > -D s (0):=C s . (41) 

Therefore, from Eq. (24), the requisite to perform walking continuously is found as follows: 

S 1 C S + S 2 >C S . (42) 

Next, we argue the state that dynamics of walking is converged on a unique trajectory, i.e. the 
equilibrium state. On such condition, PDAC Constant of every step is converged on constant 
value. That is, 

Cs[k] = C 3 [k + l]:=C*. 

>- 0.8 

0.1 0.2 0.3 

Step length [m] 

0.4 0.5 

Fig. 5. Condition of 6 and 7 in order to generate continual walking 

Bipedal Walking Control based on the 

Assumption of the Point-contact: Sagittal Motion Control and Stabilization 195 

Hence, from Eq. (24), 

C* = SiC* + S 2 
<=► S 2 = C*(1-S 1 ) (43) 

is held. Substituting Eq. (43) into Eq. (42), 

(1-S 1 )(C*-Q)>0 (44) 

is obtained. From Eq. (41), it is clear that 

C* > C s . (45) 

From Eqs. (44) and (45), the requisite to perform walking continuously, Eq. (42), is described 
as follows: 

1 - Si > 0. (46) 

As for our robot (Gorilla Robot 1 (Kajima et al. (2004)): Fig. 9, Table 1), Eq. (46) is the range 
shown in Fig. 5. Although we assume 7 < j in Fig. 5, actual upper bound is decided 
according to the limitation of robot's specification such as the torque to swing a leg forward 
or to keep a torso angle at constant value. 

4.3 Proof of stability 

Lastly, we prove the stability by Liapunov Theory using the conditions found above. The 
error between actual C s and convergent value is defined as 

SC S := C* - Q. (47) 

The following positive definite function, V, is defined, 

V = (SC S ) 2 . 

Since V(0) = and V > (SC S 7^ 0), it is apparent that V is positive definite. From Eqs. (24), 
(43), and (47), finite difference of V is 

Ay = V[k + 1]-V[k] 

= 5C s [k+l] 2 -5C s [k] 2 

= (SC S [k + 1] + SC S [k] ) (SC S [k + l]-6Cs [k] ) 

= -(2C* - C s [k + 1] - C s [k])(C s [k + 1] - C s [k]) 

= -(2C* - SiC s [fc] - S 2 - Cs[fc])(SiC s [fc] + S 2 - Cs[*]) 

= -(2C* - SiC s [fc] - (1 - S^Q - C s [k}) (SiCs[fc] + (1 - Si)C* - c s w) 

= -(l + S 1 )(l-S 1 )(C*-C s [/c]) 2 

= -(l + Si)(l-Si)AC s [fc] 2 . (48) 

Since it is clear that 1 + S! = 1 + H 2 >0 from Eq. (41) and that 1 - Si > from Eqs. (46) and 
(48) is 

Ay = (SC s = 0). (49) 

In addition, 

Ay < (SC S ^ 0) (50) 

is held. From Eq. (49) and (50), Ay is negative definite. Therefore, the equilibrium point, C*, 
is asymptotically stable in the range shown in Fig. 5. 

196 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

4.4 Simulation 

Next, stability proof described in the previous subsection is confirmed by the numerical sim- 
ulation. Fig. 6 is the phase portrait of 6 and alteration in terms of time. From these figures, 
the convergence of the sagittal motion can be ascertained. On this simulation, step-length is 
0.18[m], the torso angle is 7 =0.035[rad]. 

Fig. 7 depicts the return maps of PDAC Constant and the angular velocity of passive joint at 
foot-contact. These figures show that the sagittal dynamics has a sole stable fixed point. 
Finally, in order to confirm that the stability of the sagittal motion is independent of step- 
length, we perform the simulation of the various step-length. Fig. 8 is the graph of the return 
map of the angular volocity of passive joint at foot-contact vs. step-length. From this figure, 
it can be confirmed that the sagittal dynamics is stable regardless of step-length. 

-0.1 0. 

6[rad] 

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 

Time[s] 

Fig. 6. Simulation results of sagittal stabilization. (Left) Phase portrait of the sagittal dynamics. 
(Right) trajectory vs. time. 

350 
£ 340 
£ 330 

I 320 

U 

u 
< 

9 310 

310 320 330 340 

PDAC Constant (k th step) 

9* [rad/s] 

Fig. 7. Simulation results of sagittal stabilization. (Left) Return map of PDAC Constant. 
(Right) Return map of 6 at foot-contact. 

Bipedal Walking Control based on the 

Assumption of the Point-contact: Sagittal Motion Control and Stabilization 

197 

Ok [rad/s] 

Fig. 8. Return map of at foot-contact vs. step-length 

Table 1. Link parameters of Gorilla Robot 11 

Mass [kg] 

linkl 

m\ 

2.618 

link2 

mi 

3.451 

link3 

m 3 

15.143 

COG position 

linkl 

a 1 

0.23 

link2 

a 2 

0.28 

link3 

«3 

0.22 

Moment of inertia 

linkl 

h 

0.042 

link2 

h 

0.070 

link3 

h 

0.047 

Host Wort 

— l 

Ethernet 

__nf= 

Target CPU 

D/A Board 
Interface PCI-3338 

Motor 

Motors 

Encoders 

Counter Board 
Interface PCI-6201 

1 

' 1 

Sensors 

Robot 

\ 

A/D Board 

DSP 
Receiver Board 

Chassis 

Photo 
sensor 

.* <h 

>QHO«?; 

-€#■■ 

i& 

^ 

L x =0.22 

L 2 = 0.23 

/y n 

Fig. 9. Gorilla Robot I (about 1.0[m] height, 22.0[kg] weight, 24 DOF) 

198 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

5. Experiment 

In order to ascertain the validity of proposed method, we conducted the experiment. Both 
sagittal controller and lateral one are employed simultaneously and 3-D dynamic walking is 
realized. Note that, in the following experiment, estimated viscous torque is applied to the 
ankle joints of stance-leg in order to realize the passive joint virtually. 

5.1 Experimental Setup 

Fig. 9 depicts our experimental setup and our robot "Gorilla Robot 11 (Kajima et al. (2004))". 
This robot is driven by 24 AC motors of 20-30 W with 100-200 times of speed reduction by 
harmonic gears. It has the photo sensors on its soles to perceive foot-contact. 

5.2 Experimental results 

In this experiment, the robot bends its knee joint of the swing leg so as to prevent the foot being 
in friction with the ground immediately after foot-contact on the assumption that the effect of 
knee bending on the robot dynamics can be neglected. The foot of the swing leg is actuated 
so as to be kept parallel to the ground. The experiment was performed on the basically level 
and flat ground which has maximum 1.0 [cm] irregularity without discontinuities. 
In this chapter, the desired step-length is given to be gradually increased within initial 5 steps 
up to 0.15[m] and after 5 steps it is fixed at 0.15[m]. As a result of experiment, the dynamic and 
natural walking is realized over 25 steps. The step-length is about 0.15[m] and the walking 
velocity is about 0.23[m/s]. Fig. 10 shows the snapshots of the PDAC walking at 1st, 5th, 9th, 
12th, 14th, 16th step respectively. The angle and angular velocity of the lower body joints are 
depicted in Fig. 11 and Fig. 12. As shown in these figures, the smooth dynamics motion is 
realized periodically. 

Fig. 10. Snapshots of the walking experiment. Each figure shows the snapshots at (a)lst (b)5th 
(c)9th (d)12th (e)14th (f)16th step. 

Bipedal Walking Control based on the 

Assumption of the Point-contact: Sagittal Motion Control and Stabilization 

199 

Fig. 11. Angle of the joints (a) in the lateral plane (b) in the sagittal plnae 

9i 

ii iiii li 

;' :■: 

1 

f- r, », 

v <f. •: 

f -f I 

i ; 

f 'fW : 

J 

2 

4 

(a) 

8 1( 
Time[X 

Fig. 12. Angular Velocity of the joints (a) in the lateral plane (b) in the sagittal plnae 

6. Conclusion 

This chapter designed the sagittal motion controller of biped walking and proved the stability 
of sagittal motion designed by means of PDAC. The proof was conducted by the Liapunov 
Theory, and the convergence domain was also investigated. We confirmed the correctness of 
proof by numerical simulation. Finally, a three-dimensional dynamic walking whose step- 
length is about 0.15[m] and velocity is about 0.23[m/s] was realized by coupling the sagittal 
motion and lateral motion. The proof in this chapter handled the stability of 2-D dynam- 
ics, thus the future work is to propose the walking controller achieving the stability of 3-D 
dynamics, and prove the 3-D stability of dynamic walking. 

7. References 

Chevallereau, C. (2003). Time-Scaling Control for an Underactuated Biped Robot. IEEE Trans- 
actions on Robotics Automation, Vol.19, No.2, pp.362-368, 2003. 

Doi, M.; Hasegawa, Y. & Fukuda, T. (2004a). Passive trajectory control of the lateral motion in 
bipedal walking. Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa- 
tion, pp.3049-3054, New Orleans, May 2004. 

Doi, M.; Hasegawa, Y. & Fukuda, T. (2004b). Passive Dynamic Autonomous Control of Bipedal 
Walking. Proceedings oflEEE-RAS/RSJ International Conference on Humanoid Robots, Pa- 
per no. 72, Los Angeles, November 2004. 

Furusho, J. & Sano, A. (1990). Sensor-based Control of a Nine-Link Biped. The International 
Journal of Robotics Research, Vol.9, No.2, pp.83-98, 1990. 

200 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Goswami, A.; Espiau, B. & Keramane, A. (1997). Limit cycles in a passive compass gait biped 
and passivity-mimicking control laws. Autonomous Robots, Vol.4, No.3, pp. 273-286, 
1997. 

Grishin, A. A.; Formal'sky, A. M.; Lensky, A. V. & Zhitomirsky, S. V. (1994). Dynamic Walking 
of a Vehicle With Two Telescopic Legs Controlled by Two Drives. The International 
Journal of Robotics Research, Vol.13, No.2, pp.137-147, 1994. 

Grizzle, J. W.; Abba, G. & Plestan, F. (2001). Asymptotically Stable Walking for Biped Robots: 
Analysis via Systems with Impulse Effects. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 
Vol.46, No.l, pp.56-64, 2001. 

Hirai, K.; Hirose, M; Haikawa, Y. & Takenaka, T. (1998).The Development of Honda Hu- 
manoid Robot. Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa- 
tion, pp.1321-1326, Leuven, May 1998. 

Kajima, H.; Doi, M.; Hasegawa, Y. & Fukuda, T. (2004). A study on brachiation controller for 
a multi-locomotion robot -realization of smooth, continuous brachiation-. Advanced 
Robotics, vol.18, no.10, pp.1025-1038, 2004. 

Kajita, S.; Yamaura, T. & Kobayashi, A. (1992). Dynamic walking control of a biped robot 
along a potential conserving orbit. IEEE Transactions on Robotics Automation, Vol.8, 
No.4, pp.431-438, 1992. 

Kaneko, K.; Harada, K.; Kanehiro, F; Miyamori, G. & Akachi, K. (2008). Humanoid Robot 
HRP-3. Proceedings of the IEEE/RS] International Conference on Intelligent Robots and 
Systems, pp.2471-2478, Nice, September 2008. 

Kuo, A. D. (1999). Stabilization of Lateral Motion in Passive Dynamic Walking. The Interna- 
tional Journal of Robotics Research, Vol.18, No.9, pp.917-930, 1999. 

Miura, H. & Shimoyama, I., (1984). Dynamic Walking of a biped. The International Journal of 
Robotics Research, Vol.3, No.2, pp.60-74, 1984. 

Nakanishi, J.; Morimoto, J.; Endo, G.; Cheng, G.; Schaal, S. & Kawato, M. (2004). A Framework 
for Learning Biped Locomotion with Dynamical Movement Primitives, Proceedings of 
IEEE-RAS/RSJ International Conference on Humanoid Robots, Paper no. 81, Los Angeles, 
November 2004. 

Nishiwaki, K.; Kagami, S.; Kuniyoshi, Y; Inaba, M. & Inoue, H. (2002). Online Generation 
of Humanoid Walking Motion based on a Fast Generation Method of Motion Pat- 
tern that Follows Desired ZMP Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent 
Robots and Systems, pp. 2684-2689, Lausanne, September 2002. 

Ono, K.; Furuichi, T. & Takahashi, R. (2004). Self-Excited Walking of a Biped Mechanism With 
Feet. The International Journal of Robotics Research, Vol.23, No.l, pp.55-68, 2004. 

Takanishi, A.; Ishida, M.; Yamazaki, Y & Kato, I. (1985). The Realization of Dynamic Walking 
Robot WL-10RD. Proceedings of International Conference on Advanced Robotics, pp.459- 
466, Tokyo, September 1985. 

Vukobratovic, M. & Borovac, B. (2004). ZERO-MOMENT POINT-THIRTY FIVE YEARS OF 
ITS LIFE. International Journal of Humanoid Robotics, vol.1, no.l, pp. 157-173, 2004. 

Westervelt, E. R.; Buche, G. & Grizzle, J. W. (2004). Experimental Validation of a Framework 
for the Design of Controllers that Induce Stable Walking in Planar Bipeds. The Inter- 
national Journal of Robotics Research, Vol.24, No.6, pp.559-582, 2004. 

12 

Simulated Regulator to Synthesize 

ZMP Manipulation and Foot Location 

for Autonomous Control of Biped Robots 

Tomomichi Sugihara 

Kyushu University 
Japan 

1. Introduction 

Biped robots have potentially high mobilities. Since they have similar morphologies with the 
humans' lower limbs, they are expected to grow up into the robots which can travel wherever 
humans can. To make biped robots catch up with such an expectation still needs to resolve 
many challenges. 

The two bases of pedipulation, namely, the legged motion control are the indirect reaction 
force manipulation (Fujimoto et al., 1998; Furusho & Masubuchi, 1986; Mitobe et al., 1995; 
Vukobratovic et al., 1970) and the discontinuous grounding foot location (Kajita & Tani, 1995; 
Miura & Shimoyama, 1984; Raibert et al., 1984; Witt, 1970). The former is necessary to trans- 
port the center of mass (COM) of the floating multibody system, which is not mechanically 
connected to the inertial frame. The latter is required to reform the supporting region of the 
system, which determines the limitation of the physically available reaction forces. Each has 
a strongly nonlinear property, so that the synthesis of them is still an open problem. 
A major solution against it is to refer the motion trajectory which is defined as a function of 
time. It can coordinate the fullbody motion involving foot location and COM transportation 
rather easily with physical feasibility represented by ZMP (Vukobratovic & Stepanenko, 1972) 
and geometric constraints such as collision avoidance taken into account. Many successful 
biped walkers based on this approach have been appeared (Hirai et al., 1998; Huang et al., 
2001; Kajita et al, 2003; Loftier et al., 2003; Nagasaka et al., 1999; 2004; Sugihara & Nakamura, 
2005; Takanishi et al., 1988). Such time-slaved controls, however, are not robust against var- 
ious extrinsic events. While they work in situations where sufficient knowledge about the 
environment and the task is given in advance, they are less promising in fields of action with 
many uncertainties. It is desired that the control system is designed as an autonomous system, 
namely, a system which does not explicitly depend on time. 

Some COM control methods by manipulating the reaction force or ZMP in realtime were pro- 
posed (Fujimoto et al., 1998; Mitobe et al., 1995; Sugihara et al., 2002). They focused on the 
COM control under a given supporting condition, and the foot location strategies were out of 
the scope. Some step wise-stable autonomous biped controllers in accordance with the point- 
foot contact were also proposed (Gubina et al., 1974; Kajita et al., 1992; Westervelt et al., 2004). 
The application to realistic robots which support themselves on their soles has been a future 
work. Passive dynamic walking (Collins et al., 2001; McGeer, 1990; Yamakita et al., 2000) is 

202 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

another approach to design an autonomous biped controller by utilizing an inherent stability 
of discretized biped dynamics. It stands on the ideally perfect plastic collision between the 
robot and the ground, and thus, has a low stabilizing ability 

This paper proposes a control to synthesize the above ZMP manipulation control and the foot 
location in a consistent manner. We design a regulator based on the approximate dynamical 
model of a biped robot, focusing on a simple relationship between COM and ZMP. In this 
stage, the feasible area where ZMP can exist is unbounded against the physical constraint. 
In this sense, we call it the simulated regulator. When the desired ZMP is located out of the 
supporting region, it is modified to be within the actual region. The robot is controlled in 
such a way that the real ZMP tracks the desired ZMP. Simultaneously, the supporting region 
is deformed by a foot replacements to include the original desired ZMP in the future. The 
regulator gains are decided by the pole assignment method in order to give COM a slow 
mode and ZMP a fast mode explicitly, which matches the role of each foot. Since both the 
ZMP manipulation and the foot location originate from the identical simulated regulator, a 
totally consistent control system is made up. In addition, it is shown that a cyclic walk is 
automatically generated without giving a walking period explicitly by coupling the support- 
state transition and the goal-state transition. It does not assume a periodicity of the motion 
trajectory, and hence, seamless starting and stopping can be achieved. 

2. Simulated COM-ZMP regulator 

2.1 Linearized biped system and simulated regulator 

(a)Precise anthropomorphic model (b)Inverted pendulum metaphorized model 

Fig. 1. Approximately mass-concentrated biped model. 

The strict equation of motion of a biped robot takes a complicated form with tens of degrees- 
of-freedom. Here, we assume that an effect of the moment about COM is smaller enough 
to be neglected than that about ZMP due to the movement of COM. Then, the macroscopic 
behavior of the legged system is represented by the motion of COM. The equation of motion 
in horizontal direction of a biped model with such a mass-concentrated approximation as 

Simulated Regulator to Synthesize ZMP Manipulation 
and Foot Location for Autonomous Control of Biped Robots 

203 

Fig. 1(B) is expressed as follows: 

x = co 2 (x — %z) 
y = tv 2 (y-y z ), 

(1) 

(2) 

where p G = [ x y z } is the position of COM, and p z = [ x z Vz z z } is ZMP. co is defined 
as: 

^ s _E±s ( >o), 

z-z z 

(3) 

where g is the acceleration of gravity, and z z is the ground level, which is known, z, x and y 
axes are aligned along the gravity, the forward and the leftward directions, respectively. Eq.(l) 
and (2) imply that COM can be controlled via manipulation of ZMP. 

Fig. 2. Coupled movement of ZMP and COM in the ground-kick in the double support phase. 
ZMP travels fast between the feet to overtake COM. 

The coupled movement of ZMP and COM is not simple. Let us consider a case where the 
robot lifts up one foot from the both-standing state, for example. Note that, in such situations, 
a conventional distinction between swing foot and stance foot does not make sense any longer, 
since neither feet are swinging. However, they are obviously different from each other in terms 
of function. In this paper, the foot to be the swing foot is called kicking foot, and that to be the 
stance foot is called pivoting foot, instead. 

The sequence is illustrated by Fig. 2. ZMP is required to be within the pivoting sole at the 
end of the phase in order to detach the kicking foot off the ground, while it moves into the 
sole of kicking foot in the initial phase in order to accelerate COM towards the pivoting foot. 
Namely, ZMP initially moves oppositely against the direction of the desired COM movement, 
and overtakes COM during the motion. The fact that the biped robot is a non-minimum- 
phase-transition system as well as the inverted pendulum underlies the requirement of such 
a complex manipulation of ZMP. In addition, ZMP travels faster than COM between the feet 
in the double support phase, as ZMP depends on the acceleration of the robot. Both modes 
of COM and ZMP movement are desired to be explicitly designed in accordance with the 
locations of feet. Then, we include ZMP in the state variable and regard the ZMP rate as the 
input. The linearized state equation is represented as follows: 

x = Ax-\- bu, 

(4) 

204 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

where the motion along x-axis is only considered from the isomorphism of Eq.(l) and (2), and: 

,u = x z , 

respectively. In the above equation assumed that the vertical movement of COM is slower 
enough to regard as co ~ const, than the horizontal movement. The ZMP rate is decided 
based on the state feedback around the referential state re fx. 

X 

1 

X 

, A = 

cv 2 

-co 2 

, b = 

*z 

1 

T (ref- 

it ( 

(5) 

The gain k is designed by the pole assignment method so as to embed a faster mode explicitly 
into ZMP movement than the mode of COM. The motion along y-axis is dealt with as well. 
In this stage, we don't constrain ZMP in the supporting region, so that the system is not 
necessarily physically consistent. In this sense, let us call it the simulated ZMP and represent 
it by p z = [ Xz yz z z] • As long as p z is within the supporting region, the actual desired 
ZMP d p z is set for the same position with p z . 

Simulated ZMP Actual desired ZMP 

Fig. 3. The concept of the simulated regulator. When the simulated ZMP p z lies out of the 
supporting region, the desired ZMP d p z is set for the proximity to the supporting region. At 
the same time, the swing foot is relocated to deform the supporting region so as to include p z 
in the future. 

Fig. 3 illustrates the idea of the proposed control. The situation where p z lies out of the 
supporting region means that COM cannot be provided with the desired acceleration under 
the current supporting condition. In order to compromise this inconsistency between the 
desired control and the acceptable control, the following two maneuvers are required. One is 
to take a physically-feasible acceleration which is the nearest to the desired value by setting 
the desired ZMP d p z for the proximity of p z to the supporting region as Fig. 4 depicts. The 
motion continuity at the moment of landing is held by resetting the simulated ZMP p z for the 
originally desired ZMP d p z - This idea has been already proposed by the authors (Sugihara 
et al., 2002). The other is to deform and expand the supporting region so as to include p z in 
the future, which is described in the following section. 

Simulated Regulator to Synthesize ZMP Manipulation 
and Foot Location for Autonomous Control of Biped Robots 

205 

Foot Stamp 

Left Foot Stamp 
Fig. 4. Substitution of p z for d p z to match the actual supporting region. 

2.2 Foot location control based on simulated ZMP 

The deformation of the supporting region is achieved via the relocation of stance feet. Suppose 
ZMP is within the pivoting sole. Let us define that p s = [ x$ ys %s } an d Pk = l x K Vk z k } 
are the tip positions of the pivoting foot and the kicking foot, respectively. They correspond 
to the positions of the stance foot and the swing foot during the single support phase, respec- 
tively. We decide the desired position of the foot d p K = d x^ d yK d %K by the following 
procedure. 

The COM acceleration which the simulated regulator requires (called the simulated COM accel- 
eration, hereafter), and the desired COM acceleration which conforms to the actual supporting 
condition (called the desired COM acceleration in short, hereafter) are defined by the relative 
COM locations with respect to the simulated ZMP p z and the originally desired ZMP d p z , 
respectively. The necessity of a relocation of grounding feet arises in case where the desired 
COM acceleration is inconsistent with the simulated COM acceleration. It is judged with re- 
spect to x- and y-axes independently. d x% is defined as follows: 

d x _JA**z + (l- 

[xk 

h = (x-x z )(x- 

)x s (for i x < 0) 
(for i x > 0) 

'*z) 

(6) 
(7) 

where \ x is a constant to define the step magnitude (A x > 1). The above rule means that the 
robot puts its swing foot on the place where the desired COM acceleration orients to the same 
direction with the simulated COM acceleration, if they direct counterwards to each other. 
For the motion in y-axis, d y' K is firstly computed from the designed Ay(> 1) as well. Then, it is 
converted to d y^ by the following rule in order to avoid the self -collision between both feet: 

vk = v + 

d y' K 

y±7( d yk 

yY + a 

(8) 

where + is chosen for the left leg for the double sign, while — for the right leg, and y is the 
inner boundary of the swing foot. The above function has a profile as shown in Fig. 6. A 

206 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Vk 

left foot 

right foot 

Fig. 5. Step ratio X x to cover simu- Fig. 6. Foot location transformation in y-axis for 
lated ZMP in the future. self-collision avoidance. 

desired landing position 

x s + s 

kicking foot 

Vk 

Fig. 7. Spatial foot trajectory (left) in xz-plane (right) in xy-plane. 

smaller constant a makes the curve approach to the asymptotic lines with the break point 

( d y' K > d VK) = (M)- 

Suppose the initial position of the swing foot is p K0 = [ x^o ym Z K0 } > an d t ne lift height of 
the swing foot d z& is defined as: 

2 z K = 2hJ6(l-6) 

( d x K -x K0 ) 2 ^( d y K -y K0 ) 2 1 

(9) 
(10) 

It generates a spatial trajectory which carries the swing foot along a half ellipsoid with a height 
h as the leftside of Fig. 7, and makes it land on a circle with the center (xko, yxo) an d the radius 
X S ~ x K0+ss f ne bird's-eye view of which is depicted in the right side of Fig. 7; it lands to the 
point with a stride x§ — x^o + s from the initial position as long as d y^ = ym is ensured. 
The above procedure does not guarantee the time continuity of d p K , so that it might jump 
largely at the moment when ZMP travels to the pivoting sole, or when the relative COM 
location with respect to the simulated ZMP comes in the opposite side of that with respect to 

Simulated Regulator to Synthesize ZMP Manipulation 
and Foot Location for Autonomous Control of Biped Robots 

207 

r(: 'Jr, 

Pg 

Simulated 
Regulator 

Pg 

Pz 

Ps 

Foot 
rjA Locater 

yyy/^yy^/^y 

Low pass 
Filter 

6 Pk 

Ps 

y/////////// " ' ' 

\ d Pz 
^Saturatorgg 

ip 

Observer 

/////////// 

IK 

FK 

motor 

Robot 

Fig. 8. Block diagram of the proposed biped control system with the simulated regulator. 

the desired ZMP, for instance. Then, the time sequence of d p K is smoothened by second-order 
low-pass filters, for example. 

Fig. 8 is a block diagram of the proposed control system described above. 'IP Observer 7 in 
the figure shows a subsystem which outputs the desired COM position d p G equivalent to the 
desired ZMP d p z (Sugihara et al., 2002). One can note that both the COM controller with ZMP 
manipulation and the foot relocation controller branch from the identical simulated regulator 
and join in the inverse kinematics solver (the motion rate resolver). 

3. Autonomous walk by coupled goal-state/support-state transition 

Suppose the referential COM position is re fp G = re ^x re fy re fz , the referential state of the 

simulated regulator in x-axis is re fx = re f x re f x . The control in the previous section 

yields a step motion automatically by locating re fp G out of the supporting region on purpose. 
This property is utilized to achieve an autonomous continual walk by coupling the referential 
goal state transition and the supporting state transition, namely, by repeating to set re fp out 
of the supporting region after the supporting region is deformed so as to include re fp G by 
the stepping. More concretely, re f x is defined by the following equation for a given s and the 
position of pivoting foot x$ in x-axis: 

ref X: 

xg + rs, 

(11) 

where r is a positive coefficient (0 < r < 1). In cases where the robot changes the orientation, 
x- and y-axes are again realigned with respect to the moving direction, and the desired COM 
position is computed with the above Eq.(ll). 

4. Simulation 

We verified the proposed control via a simulation with an inverted pendulum model whose 
mass was concentrated at the tip. The length of the pendulum was 0.27[m], which fits to the 
robot "mighty" (Sugihara et al., 2007) shown in Fig. 9. Note that the robot mass does not 
affect the behavior of the inverted pendulum. The both sole were modelled as rectangles with 
the length 0.055 [m] to the toe edge, 0.04[m] to the heel edge, and 0.035 [m] to each side. The 
state feedback gains were designed by the pole assignment method. The poles were -3, -6 
and -10 with respect to x-axis, and -2.5, -25 and -30 with respect to y-axis. The other control 

208 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Height: 580 [mm] 

Weight: 6.5 [kg] 

Number of joints: 20 ( 8 for arms,12 for legs ) 

Fig. 9. External view and specifications of the robot "mighty". 

parameters were set for \ x = 2, Ay = 3, a = 0.001, r = 0.9 and h = 0.01 [m], respectively. The 
desired swing foot position was smoothened by a second-order low-pass filter / 002 s + i)2 • The 
initial state was set for (x,y) = (0,0) and (x,y) = (0,0). The initial stance position of the left 
and the right feet were (0,0.045) and (0, —0.045), respectively. From the first to the sixth step, 
the stride s was set for 0.3 [m], and the referential COM position was automatically updated 
by the method described in section 3. Immediately after landing the sixth step, the referential 
COM position was settled at the midpoint of both feet. 

The loci of the referential COM position ( re f x, re fy), the actual COM (the tip point of the in- 
verted pendulum) (x,y), the simulated ZMP position (xz,yz)f the actually desired ZMP posi- 
tion ( "xz, yz)> the referential feet positions { d xi, d yi), ( d XR, d yR) and the filtered positions of 
them (xi, yi), (xr, y^j are plotted in Fig. 10. It is seen that an almost cyclic continual walk was 
achieved without giving a walk period explicitly by an alternation of the supporting-region 
deformation via the pedipulation and the goal-state transition. In this example motion, the 
simulated ZMP and the actually desired ZMP in y-axis always coincided with each other, so 
that a sideward stepping was not resulted. The difference of COM and ZMP modes particu- 
larly appear in the movement along y-axis. The given pole to design feedback gains set the 
time-constant of the sideward kicking for about 0.1 [s], which contributed to ensure about 60% 
of duty ratio of the swinging phase. Fig. 11 zooms a part of Fig. 10 from t = ~ 1.5. d xz dif- 
fers from xz in t ~ 0.4 ~ 0.5, t ~ 0.9 ^ 1.0 and t ~ 1.4 ~ 1.5. d Xz in those terms are thought 
to be saturated at the toe edge of the supporting sole, xz is synchronized at t ~ 0.5, 1.0 when 
the swing foot lands on the ground, and the continuity of ZMP is held. d Xi and d x^ discon- 
tinuously jump at t ~ 0.15, 0.75, 1.25 which are thought to be times when the ZMP reaches the 
pivoting sole. In spite of that, Xi and xr keep continuous, thanks to the low-pass filters. The 
robot responded to the sudden stop of the reference at t ~ 3.0 without bankruptcy. Fig. 12 
shows some sequential snapshots of a motion of the inverted pendulum. The red ball and the 
green ball in the figure indicate the referential COM position and the simulated ZMP position, 
respectively. The magenta area is the supporting region composed from the grounding sole. 

Simulated Regulator to Synthesize ZMP Manipulation 
and Foot Location for Autonomous Control of Biped Robots 

209 

(a) Loci of COM, ZMP and feet in x-axis 
Fig. 10. Resulted loci of COM, ZMP and feet. 

(b) Loci of COM, ZMP and feet in y-axis 

Fig. 11. Zoomed loci of COM, ZMP and feet. 

Fig. 13 shows snapshots of the synthesized robot motion computed by the above result and 
the inverse kinematics. Note that the fullbody dynamics is not considered. 

5. Conclusion 

We developed an autonomous biped controller, in which the ZMP manipulation under the 
current support condition and the pedipulation to deform the future support region were 
synthesized. Both are based on an identical simulated regulator, so that they are integrated 
into the total control system without any conflicts. Since the simulated regulator involves 
ZMP in the state variable, it is possible to give a slow mode to COM and a fast mode to ZMP, 
which is accommodated to the current choice of stance and kicking feet, explicitly by the pole 
assignment method. 

The autonomous controller is promising to improve the system robustness against extrinsic 
events and uncertainties in the environment. The next short-term issues are to verify the ab- 
sorption performance of perturbations and to examine the adaptability against rough terrains. 

210 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

ssps 
sss sssasa 

Fig. 12. Snapshots of an inverted pendulum motion controlled by the proposed method. 

a a 

a 4 5 a 

Fig. 13. Snapshots of a walking motion replayed by mighty. 

This work was supported in part by Grant-in- Aid for Young Scientists (B) #20760170, Japan 
Society for the Promotion of Science and by 'The Kyushu University Research Superstar Pro- 
gram (SSP)", based on the budget of Kyushu University allocated under President's initiative. 

6. References 

Collins, S. H., Wisse, M. & Ruina, A. (2001). A Three-Dimensional Passive-Dynamic Walk- 
ing Robot with Two Legs and Knees, The International Journal of Robotics Research 
20(7): 607-615. 

Fujimoto, Y, Obata, S. & Kawamura, A. (1998). Robust Biped Walking with Active Interaction 
Control between Foot and Ground, Proceedings of the 1998 IEEE International Confer- 
ence on Robotics & Automation, pp. 2030-2035. 

Furusho, J. & Masubuchi, M. (1986). Control of a Dynamical Biped Locomotion System for 
Steady Walking, Transactions of the ASME, Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, 
and Control 108: 111-118. 

Gubina, F., Hemami, H. & McGhee, R. B. (1974). On the dynamic stability of biped locomotion, 
IEEE Transactions on Bio-Medical Engineering BME-21(2): 102-108. 

Hirai, K., Hirose, M., Haikawa, Y & Takenaka, T. (1998). The Development of Honda Hu- 
manoid Robot, Proceeding of the 1998 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Au- 
tomation, pp. 1321-1326. 

Huang, Q., Yokoi, K., Kajita, S., Kaneko, K., Ami, H., Koyachi, N. & Tanie, K. (2001). Plan- 
ning Walking Patterns for a Biped Robot, IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation 
17(3): 280-289. 

Kajita, S., Kanehiro, F., Kaneko, K., Fujiwara, K., Harada, K., Yokoi, K. & Hirukawa, H. 
(2003). Biped Walking Pattern Generation by using Preview Control of Zero-Moment 
Point, Proceedings of the 2003 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation, 
pp. 1620-1626. 

Kajita, S. & Tani, K. (1995). Experimental Study of Biped Dynamic Walking in the Linear 
Inverted Pendulum Mode, Proceedings of the 1995 IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics & Automation, pp. 2885-2819. 

Simulated Regulator to Synthesize ZMP Manipulation 

and Foot Location for Autonomous Control of Biped Robots 21 1 

Kajita, S., Yamaura, T. & Kobayashi, A. (1992). Dynamic Walking Control of a Biped Robot 
Along a Potential Energy Conserving Orbit, IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automa- 
tion 8(4): 431-438. 

Loftier, K., Gienger, M. & Pfeiffer, F. (2003). Sensor and Control Design of a Dynamically 
Stable Biped Robot, Proceedings of the 2003 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & 
Automation, pp. 484-490. 

McGeer, T. (1990). Passive Dynamic Walking, The International Journal of Robotics Research 
9(2): 62-82. 

Mitobe, K., Mori, N., Aida, K. & Nasu, Y. (1995). Nonlinear feedback control of a biped walk- 
ing robot, Proseedings of the 1995 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automa- 
tion, pp. 2865-2870. 

Miura, H. & Shimoyama, I. (1984). Dynamic Walk of a Biped, The International Journal of 
Robotics Research 3(2): 60-74. 

Nagasaka, K., Inaba, M. & Inoue, H. (1999). Walking Pattern Generation for a Humanoid 
Robot Based on Optimal Gradient Method, Proceedings of 1999 IEEE International Con- 
ference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, pp. VI-908-913. 

Nagasaka, K., Kuroki, Y, Suzuki, S., Itoh, Y & Yamaguchi, J. (2004). Integrated Motion Control 
for Walking, Jumping and Running on a Small Bipedal Entertainment Robot, Proceed- 
ings of the 2004 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 3189-3914. 

Raibert, M. H., Jr., H. B. B. & Chepponis, M. (1984). Experiments in Balance with a 3D One- 
Legged Hopping Machine, The International Journal of Robotics Research 3(2): 75-92. 

Sugihara, T. & Nakamura, Y (2005). A Fast Online Gait Planning with Boundary Condition 
Relaxation for Humanoid Robots, Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE International Conference 
on Robotics & Automation, pp. 306-311. 

Sugihara, T., Nakamura, Y & Inoue, H. (2002). Realtime Humanoid Motion Generation 
through ZMP Manipulation based on Inverted Pendulum Control, Proceedings of the 
2002 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation, pp. 1404-1409. 

Sugihara, T., Yamamoto, K. & Nakamura, Y (2007). Hardware design of high performance 
miniature anthropomorphic robots, Robotics and Autonomous System 56(1): 82-94. 

Takanishi, A., Egusa, Y, Tochizawa, M., Takeya, T. & Kato, I. (1988). Realization of Dynamic 
Walking Stabilized with Trunk Motion, ROMANSY 7, pp. 68-79. 

Vukobratovic, M., Frank, A. A. & Juricic, D. (1970). On the Stability of Biped Locomotion, 
IEEE Transactions on Bio-Medical Engineering BME-17(1): 25-36. 

Vukobratovic, M. & Stepanenko, J. (1972). On the Stability of Anthropomorphic Systems, 
Mathematical Biosciences 15(1): 1-37. 

Westervelt, E. R., Buche, G. & Grizzle, J. W. (2004). Experimental Validation of a Framework 
for the Design of Controllers that Induce Stable Walking in Planar Bipeds, The Inter- 
national Journal of Robotics Research 24(6): 559-582. 

Witt, D. C. (1970). A Feasibility Study on Automatically-Controlled Powered Lower-Limb 
Prostheses, Report, University of Oxford. 

Yamakita, M., Asano, F & Furuta, K. (2000). Passive Velocity Field Control of Biped Walking 
Robot, Proceedings of the 2000 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation, 
pp. 3057-3062. 

212 Climbing and Walking Robots 

13 

Nonlinear 'Hoo Control Applied to Biped Robots 

Adriano A. G. Siqueira, Marco H. Terra and Leonardo Tubota 

University of Sao Paulo, Sao Carlos, Sao Paulo 

Brazil 

1. Introduction 

Researches on biped robots have been the focus of many universities and industries around 
the world Hirukawa et al. (2004). The challenges in the study of this kind of system, beyond, 
of course, the stability of the walking, are strongly coupled with nonlinearities and with the 
occurrence of discontinuities in the joint variables when the swing foot touches the ground. 
Control strategies for biped robots can be classified in two categories according to the degree 
of actuation of the joints: control strategies based on the Zero Moment Point (ZMP), which 
is considered a fully actuated system, and control strategies based on the dynamic passive 
walking, which the few (or even none) degrees of actuation are used. 

The ZMP criterion to evaluate biped robot stability was initially proposed by Vukobratovic 
& Juricic (1969). Shortly, the ZMP is the point in the ground where the resultant of reaction 
moments are null. If the ZMP is inside the support polygon, defined by the contact points of 
the robot with the ground, the walking is stable. In Huang et al. (2001), it is presented one of 
many trajectory generators for biped robots taking into account the ZMP criterion. Specific 
points of the ankle and hip trajectories are defined according to the desired step length and 
duration. The minimization of a functional related to the ZMP gives the desired trajectories, 
which, tracked trough the actuation of all joints, generate a stable movement of the biped 
robot. 

On the other hand, the movement of passive walking robots is created by the action of the 
gravity in an inclined surface, without any joint actuation. In this case, when the foot of the 
swing leg touches the ground there is energy spending which is compensated by the ground 
slope. A passive walking occurs when the joint positions and velocities at the final of the 
step are identical to the initial conditions. The movement generated can be characterized as 
periodic movement or, in terms of nonlinear systems analysis, a limit cycle. 
The problems related to passive dynamic walking are more complex than to the static case, 
however, the dynamic walking gives higher velocities, bigger energy efficiency, and a smooth 
and anthropomorphic movement. A scientific research on these mechanisms starts with 
McGeer (1990). McGeer shows that a fully no actuated biped robot, and hence no control- 
lable, can present a stable walking on an inclined surface for some dynamic parameter selec- 
tions. In Asano et al. (2005) the passive walk is used in order to define a control law that uses 
the energy trajectory as trajectory reference, which is time independent (standard trajectories 
which depend on state variables are time dependent) and it assures the robustness of the sys- 
tem. This is the motivation to consider the passive walk as the best model in terms of energy 
consumption. 

214 Climbing and Walking Robots 

However, the basin of attraction of the limit cycle for passive walking is generally small and 
sensitive to disturbances and ground slope variations. For example, in Goswani et al. (1998), 
bifurcations with period duplication occur when the ground slope varies from 3° to 5°. In 
Spong & Bhatia (2003), it is shown that the walking can be made slope invariant for a bidi- 
mensional biped robot without knees and torso, and with actuators on the hip and ankles, 
considering a controller based on gravity compensation. It is also shown that the basin of 
attraction and the robustness can be increased using an energy-based controller. In Bhatia & 
Spong (2004), this procedure is extended to a bidimensional biped robot with knees and torso. 
Gravity compensation and energy-based controllers are also presented in Asano & Yamakita 
(2001) for passive walking robots. 

In this chapter, it is used a control strategy for passive walking robots to increase the robust- 
ness against external disturbances based on nonlinear Hoo controllers. They are based on 
linear parameter varying (LPV) representation of the biped robot. This kind of approach has 
been applied to fully actuated and underactuated robot manipulators Siqueira & Terra (2002; 
2004). The objective, as in Bhatia & Spong (2004), is to apply the robust controller to leads 
back the robot to the basin of attraction of the limit cycle. We consider that the robot leaves it 
due to the disturbances. In this way, the period of application of the controller is minimal and 
the main characteristic of passive walking (energy save) is preserved. 

The biped robot considered here, in addition to knees and torso of the robot presented in 
Bhatia & Spong (2004), has feet. For biped robots with feet, the time instant when the foot 
rotates around the toes can be determined by the Foot Rotation Indicator (FRI), described in 
Goswani (1999). The FRI is a point in the ground surface where the resultant ground reaction 
force would have to act to keep the foot stationary. In Choi & Grizzle (2005), the authors 
consider a biped robot with feet and use the FRI as control variable in the procedure to find 
the zero dynamics of the system proposed in Westervelt et al. (2003). Here, the FRI is also used 
as control variable to provide to the biped robot an anthropomorphic walking. 
This chapter is organized as follows: in Section 2, the dynamic model of the biped robot, 
considering the foot rotation, the knee strike, and the ground collision, is presented; in Section 
3.2, the robust dynamic walking control strategy using the nonlinear Koo control is proposed; 
and in Section 4, the results obtained from simulation are shown. 

2. Dynamic Model of 2D Biped Robots 

In this section we present the dynamic model of a planar walking robot, including the swing 
and ground collision phases. These phases are characterized, respectively, by having the robot 
only one foot or both feet in contact with the ground. Consider a biped robot with a torso, 
knees and feet, Figure 1. The overall system has nine degrees of freedom (DOF), correspond- 
ing to two DOF of the Y-Z plane, three DOF of each leg, and one DOF of the torso. The biped 
robot moves over a planar surface with inclination (p with relation to the inertial coordinate 
system. 

The robot configuration is described by the angles: q\ (foot of the stance leg), (\i (stance leg), ^3 
(torso), ^4 (thigh of the swing leg), q$ (shank of the swing leg), and % (foot of the swing leg). 
The generalized coordinate q\ is defined as absolute value with relation to the horizontal axis 
Y and the remaining angles are defined as relative value to the previous link. The parameters 
mass (m), length (/), center of mass (c), and inertia momentum with relation to the center of 
mass (I) of each link are shown in Table 1, where the indexes i = (1, • • • , 6) are related to the 
foot of the stance leg, stance leg, torso, thigh of the swing leg, shank of the swing leg, and 
foot of the swing leg, respectively. The parameters in Table 1 correspond to the values of the 

Nonlinear Hoc Control Applied to Biped Robots 

215 

(a) (b) 

Fig. 1. a) Bidimensional biped robot with feet, b) Ground collision model. 

bidimensional experimental robot RABBIT described in Chevallereau et al. (2003), except the 
values related to the feet, since RABBIT has no feet. The robot motion in the sagittal plane is 
divided in two phases: the swing phase and the ground collision phase. 

2.1 Swing phase 

The swing phase is considered in this chapter as consisting of three sub-phases: before the foot 
rotation, after the foot rotation and before the knee strike, and after the knee strike. During the 
first sub-phase, before the foot rotation, the foot link is parallel to the ground and its angular 
velocity is zero. The change from this phase to the phase of foot rotation around the toe occurs 
when the Foot Rotation Indicator (FRI) point is outside the foot support area. 
The FRI definition was first described in Goswani (1999), as the point in the ground surface 
where the resultant ground reaction force would have to act to keep the foot stationary. The 
FRI has some important properties for the control of a biped robot: 

• The FRI indicates the occurrence of foot rotation and its direction; 

• The location of the FRI indicates the amount of unbalanced moment on the foot; 

• The minimum distance between the support polygon and the FRI is a measurement of 
the stability margin, since that the FRI is inside of the support polygon. 

In other words to keep the foot stationary, the FRI must remain inside the foot support area. 
The FRI incorporates the biped robot dynamics, differently from the ground projection of the 
center of mass, that represents a static characteristic. The FRI is also different from the center 
of pressure, known as the zero moment point (ZMP). The ZMP is a point in the ground surface 
where the resultant ground reaction force is actually applied. Hence, the ZMP never leaves 
the foot support area, whereas the FRI does so. When the point of application of the resultant 
ground reaction force is inside the foot support area, the FRI and ZMP are coincident. In a 

216 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Parameter 

Value 

Unit 

Parameter 

Value 

Unit 

m\ 

0,5 

kg 

C\ 

0,05 

m 

ni2 

10 

kg 

Cl 

0,28 

m 

m 3 

20 

kg 

C3 

0,2 

m 

77?4 

6,8 

kg 

C 4 

0,163 

m 

m 5 

3,2 

kg 

C5 

0,128 

m 

m 6 

0,5 

kg 

C6 

0,05 

m 

h 

0,1 

m 

h 

0,329 

kg.m 2 

h 

0,8 

m 

h 

2,06 

kg.m 2 

h 

0,625 

m 

h 

1,42 

kg.m 2 

k 

0,4 

m 

h 

0,899 

kg.m 2 

h 

0,4 

m 

h 

0,878 

kg.m 2 

h 

0,1 

m 

h 

0,329 

kg.m 2 

Table 1. Biped Robot Parameters. 

three-dimensional biped robot, the coordinates of the FRI in the X-Y plane can be obtained as: 

xfri 

Vfri 

mXcig + EjLg m i x Cj (Zq + g) ~ E" =2 MjZqXci ~ E? = 2 ific y ) 

mg + L^miizct+g) 

. my Cl g + EL2 m iVci {z Ci + g) - gU miZciVq - EIL2 (fie, ) 

mg + Y4=2 m i(Zd+g) 

(i) 

where g is the gravity acceleration, x Ci and y c . are the position coordinates of the center of 

mass of the link i, x Ci , y Ci and z Ci axe the acceleration coordinates of the center of mass of the 

link i and (H Cx )i and (H Cy )i are the derivative of the angular momentum around the center of 

mass of the link i. As we are working with a planar biped robot in this chapter, if yiRP in Eq. 

1 is above 0, the foot rotation occurs. 

The foot rotation occurs in the human being due to the application of a torque around the 

ankle joint at the end of the foot stance phase. Trying to reproduce this natural behavior on 

the biped robot considered in this chapter, a torsional spring is introduced on the ankle joint 

of the stance leg (joint 2), as shown in the Figure 2. 

The function describing the torque applied by the spring, tm, with relation to the ankle joint 

displacement, (\i, is given by 

t m = Ko - K M q 2 , (2) 

where Kq > Km > are control design parameters. They are adjusted to set the foot rotation 
instant during the step, Palmer (2002). Before the foot rotation, the spring is compressed and 

Nonlinear Hoo Control Applied to Biped Robots 217 

Fig. 2. Representation of a torsional spring in the ankle joint. 

stores some part of the dynamic walking energy. During the foot rotation, the stored potential 
energy is transformed into kinematic one, keeping the dynamic walking. 
During the two sub-phases before the knee strike, the dynamic equations of the system are 
given by: 

M(q)q + C(q,q)q + g(q) = T, (3) 

where q = [q 1 q 2 q?> q^ qs qe\ T , M(q) e 3ft 6x6 is the inertia matrix, C(q, q) e 3ft 6x6 is the 
Coriolis/ centripetal matrix, g(q) <G 3ft 6 is the gravitational vector, and x = [xi X2 X3 X4 X5 t^] t 
is the applied torque vector, x z (i = 1, • • • , 6) are the torques in the toe of the stance leg, in 
the ankle of the stance leg, between the stance leg and the torso, between the stance leg and 
the thigh of the swing leg, in the knee of the swing leg, and in the ankle of the swing leg, 
respectively. The shank of the swing leg can move around the knee only to the posterior part 
of the leg, that is, q$ < 0. 

At the instant of the impact, the knee displacement vanishes, q$ = 0. The joint positions do 
not change during the impact, but the velocities suffer an abrupt change. This event can be 
modeled by conservation of the angular momentum with relation to the stance leg: 

M(q+)q+ = M{q-)q--]J\i, (4) 

where A z - are the impulsive forces generated by the impact, q + and q~ are the values of q just 
before and after the knee strike, and / z - = [0 1 0] is the Jacobian matrix generated by 
the constraint Jiq + = 0. Since M(q + ) = M(q~), because q + = q~ . 

From (4), the joint velocities after the impact are computed as function of the velocities just 
before the impact and of the constraint forces as q + = q~ — M(q)~ 1 jf\i. From the above 
considerations, the following relation is obtained: 

J i q+=0 = J i q--J i M(q)- 1 J?A i , 

which results in A z - = Xr 1 /^ - where X z - = J i M(q)~ 1 jJ . 

After the knee strike, the swing leg remains straight due the constraint forces on the knee 
generated by a mechanism that locks the joint (^5 = 0). The dynamic equations of the system, 
considering the constraint forces, are given by: 

M(q)q + C{q, q)q + g(q) =r- f r X Tl (5) 

where / r = [000010]. The constraint forces are given by A r = —X~ 1 J r M(q)~ 1 (C(q / q)q-\- 
g(q))whereX r = J r M(q)- 1 jT. 

218 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

2.2 Ground Collision Phase 

The collision of the foot of the swing leg with the ground can be modeled as a contact between 
two rigid bodies. It is considered that the heel and the toe of the foot impact the ground at the 
same instant and the foot of the stance leg is rotated. Also, the system is modeled as a biped 
robot without knees, Figure 1. In this case, there are seven DOF (two DOF on the Y-Z plane, 
two DOF for each leg and the DOF of the torso). The dynamic equation is given by: 

M e (q e )q e + C e (q e , q e )q e + g e (q e ) = r e + 5F ext , 

(6) 

where q e = [q ei q ei q e3 q e4 q e5 y z] T , y and z are the position coordinates of the toe of the 
stance leg, and 8F ext are the external forces acting on the robot in the contact points. 
It is assumed that the collision occurs during an infinitesimal period of time. The external 
forces in the impact moment can be represented by impulses. These impulsive forces gen- 
erate an instantaneous change of joint velocities, but the positions remain the same. In this 
case the torques given by the actuators are not impulsive and can be neglected. Under these 
conditions, integrating (6) during the impact duration we obtain: 

M e {q e ){qt-4e 

(7) 

where F ext are the impulsive forces, and qf and q~ are the joint velocities just after and before 
the impact, respectively. The joint positions do not change during the impact, then q+ = q~ . 
It is also assumed that the stance leg lifts from the ground without interaction, no external 
forces are applied at its contact point. In this case, the external forces, F ext/ contain only the 
forces acting on the heel and toe of the foot of the swing leg. Let Y c and Y^ be the vectors of 
position coordinates of the heel and the toe, respectively. Hence: 

F ext = [Ej(q e ) Ej(q e )\ 

F d N 

(8) 

where 

Fc(qe) 

dq e ' 

Ed(<]e) 

dqe ' 

(9) 

and F Ct , F Cn , F dj/ and F^ are the tangential and normal forces applied on the heel and on 

the toe. An additional set of four equations is obtained from the condition that the heel and 
the toe of the swing leg can not move after the impact, d/dt^¥ c (q e ) = (d^¥ c /dqe)q t 
d/dtY d (q e ) = {dW d /dq e )qt = 0, that is: 

+ = and 

E c(qe)qt = ' E d(qe)qi = 0. 

(10) 

From (7) and (10): 

M e (q e ) 

-E c (q e ) T 

-Mqef ' 

r a+ " 

r •- i 

F c (q e ) 

He 
p 

= 

He 

o 

Mle) 

J 

(11) 

with F = [F Ct F Cn Fj t F dN ] T . The value of q + is expressed in terms of qf by: 

tit 4t i£ it o qtf- 

(12) 

Nonlinear Hoc Control Applied to Biped Robots 

219 

vnr 

the trans- 

After the impact, the swing leg becomes the stance leg and vice-versa. Hence, a coordinate 
transformation is needed to reinitialize the System (3). Considering x = [q T 
formation can be given by 

x = A(x), 

(13) 

where 

A(x) 

(14) 

-% 

(^1+^2 + ^3-71 + ^6) 

(-2n -q A ) 

-ft 

-% 

(4i + ft + 43 + %) 

-q 4 
-42 

3. Robust Dynamic Walking Control 

The main problem on passive walking consists on finding a stable limit cycle without actua- 
tion of the joints for a given ground slope. However, stable limit cycles cannot be found for the 
biped robot considered in this paper without a loop of control be applied to the torso. In this 
way, PD controllers are used to keep the torso in a fixed position with relation to the horizontal 
line, that is, the absolute angle, 4 = q\ + q^ + #3/ is controlled. The foot of the swing leg must 
also be controlled to reach the ground surface parallel to it at the impact instant to guarantee 
that the toe and the ankle touch the ground in the same time. In this case, the absolute angle 
$6 — ^1 + ^2 + ^4 + ^5 + ^6/ must be zero, 0^ = 0. The PD controllers are given by: 

T 4 = Kp 4 (0 4 — O4) — Xd 4 ^4/ 

(15) 

T"6 = Kp 6 (0 6 

Kd 6 #6/ 

where Kp 4 , K D/L , K Pe , and K De are proportional and derivative gains, and qf and q% are the 
desired joint position for the torso and the foot of the swing leg, respectively. 
In order to guarantee the passive walking at any ground slope, including zero inclination, a 
gravity compensation control developed by Spong & Bhatia (2003) is used. The key idea is to 
consider the existence of an initial condition x((po) = [q\(0) ^2(0) "• %(fy 4l(0) '*' %(®)} T 
such that, with only the PD controllers described above, a limit cycle is found for ground slope 
<Pq. Now suppose that the desired slope is <p. Let $ = (po — <p, Rp be the rotation defined by 
angle /3 and P(0) the potential energy, where is the absolute joint position vector. In the robot 
configuration space the representation of angle /3 is given by 

RpW 

0i -jS 

06 -P 

(16) 

220 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Now, defining P, 

P(Rp(6)) and 

the feedback control law is given by 

de 

B-\g(e)-gp(e)). 

(17) 

(18) 

This control law allows the biped robot to perform a limit cycle for ground slope (p, consider- 
ing as initial condition x((p) = [^i(0) + /3 ^(0) ■•• %i®) 4l(0) '" 46(0)] T - 

3.1 Nonlinear %«, control 

In this work, nonlinear Hoo control is applied to biped robots to increase the basin of attraction 
of the limit cycle and the robustness against disturbances. The proposed controller is based 
on design procedures developed for LPV systems. This approach provides a systematic way, 
using solutions based on Linear Matrix Inequalities (LMI), to design controllers that satisfy the 
£2 g a i n condition Wu et al. (1996). The nonlinear dynamics of the biped robot is represented 
as a LPV system whose parameters are in function of the state (p(x)), namely, quasi-LPV 
representation. 
Consider the system: 

(19) 

where x is the state vector, u is the control input vector, w is the external input vector, Z\ and 

Z2 are the output variables, and p is the parameter varying vector. 

To present Tioo performance the closed loop system need to satisfy the £2 g am condition given 

by: 

X 

■ A(p) Bi(p) 

Blip) ' 

X 

Zl 

= 

Clip) 

w 

Z 2 . 

I c 2 {p) 

I 

u 

/ T || Z || 2 df< 7 2 / 7 
Jo Jo 

\w\\ 2 dt. 

If it is possible to find a solution X(p) > to the following set of LMIs: 

Ci(p)X(p) 
BI(P) 

X(p)Cl(p) 
-I 

Blip) 

-<y 2 I 

<0 

(20) 

(21) 

where 

e(p)- 

1=1 

ax 

-B 2 {p)Bl{p) + A{p)X{p) + X(p)A(pf 

and Aip) = A(p) — Biip)Ciip) , then, the closed loop system has £2 g am ^ 7 under the state 
feedback law 

u = -(B 2 (p)X-\p)+C 2 (p))x. 

Hence, it is need to solve a set of parametric LMIs, (21), that is an infinitesimal convex opti- 
mization problem. Fortunately, a practical scheme using basis functions for Xip) and griding 
the parameter set was developed in Wu et al. (1996) to solve this problem. 
The quasi-LPV representation we are considering in this chapter for biped robots is shown 
in the following. The hybrid control strategy proposed in the next section considers that the 

Nonlinear Hoc Control Applied to Biped Robots 

221 

nonlinear 1-Loo control is applied in the two sub-phases of the movement before the knee strike. 
For the sub-phase before the foot rotation, the system is considered fully-actuated since the 
first joint value (q{) is fixed. It is considered the following dynamic equation with the inclusion 
of a disturbance vector d, corresponding to external disturbance and parametric uncertainties: 

M aa (q a )qa + Caa{qa,qa)qa + ga(qa) = T a + d, 

(22) 

where q a = [qi q?> q± qs %] T are the active joints, and M aa (qa), Caa(qa,qa), ga(qa), and r a 

are the corresponding partitions of the dynamic matrices. 

Define the state as the composition of the trajectory tracking error and its derivative as: 

qa 
q a 

Ha 
Ha 

% 

q'a 

From (22) and (23), the biped robot state space equation is given by 

x = A(q a ,q a )x + B^zv + B^u, 

(23) 

(24) 

with 

A(q a ,qa) 

-Mj(q a )C aa (q a ,q a ) 

w = Mj(q a )d, 

u = M aa \q a )(T a - M aa (qa)q d a ~ Caa(qa,qa)q d a - ga(q)). 
The applied torque is computed as 

r a = M a a(qa)(q d a + U ) + C aa (q a ,qa)qi + ga(q a ). 

(25) 

For the sub-phase after the foot rotation and before the knee strike, the system is underactu- 
ated since no torque is applied to the first joint and it is free. In this work, it is proposed to 
control only the active joints in this phase, considering the dynamic coupling with first joint 
and its dynamics. The following dynamic equation is used to design the quasi-LPV controller: 

M(q)q a + C(q,q)q a + D(q,q)qi + g(q a ) = T a + d. 

(26) 

where M = M aa - M al M n - l M la , C = C aa - M^Mn^Cu, D = C al - M^Mn^Cn, 
g = ga — MtfiMii -1 ^!, and d are the external disturbances and parametric uncertainties. Fol- 
lowing the steps described above, a quasi-LPV representation of the biped robot, similar to 
(24), can be found for this sub-phase of the movement. 

3.2 Hybrid Control 

The PD controllers and the gravity compensation controller provide a stable walking for dif- 
ferent ground slopes for initial positions close to the limit cycle. However, the basin of attrac- 
tion of a limit cycle must be large enough to provide the system robustness against distur- 
bances, parametric uncertainties and terrain variations. The controllers presented above are 
combined to produce a robust dynamic walking Bhatia & Spong (2004). 

222 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

The minimum distance between the current position to the limit cycle is computed and com- 
pared to an adjustable value C, corresponding to the limit cycle basin of attraction. The mini- 
mum distance is given as 

d = min i \\q-q r {i)\\ / (27) 

where q r (i) are discrete points on the limit cycle. 

If the distance of the initial position limit cycle is lower than C, the system converges to the 
limit cycle. If the trajectory leaves the basin of attraction, that is, the value of dis greater than 
C, a control strategy based on the nonlinear 'Hoo controller is used to come back the system to 
the basin of attraction as shown in Figure 3. 

$- 

TORSO AND 

FOOT 

CONTROL 

BIPED 

SYSTEM 

(a) Passive Diagram 

-& 

LPV 
CONTROL 

t 

TORSO AND 

FOOT 

CONTROL 

BIPED 
SYSTEM 

(b) Controlled Diagram 

Fig. 3. Hybrid Control Strategy. 

The changing point between the nonlinear 7-Lco controller and when there is not trajectory 
tracking controllers (gravity compensation and PD ones) must be chosen to guarantee a 
smooth and natural walking. Considering the walking cycle, it is chosen the instant when 

Nonlinear Hoc Control Applied to Biped Robots 223 

the knee strike as been this point. At this moment the swing leg is ahead the stance leg. The 
desired trajectory, q d , between the position where the biped leaves the basin of attraction and 
the position of the knee strike is defined in this work as a 5-th polynomial, with duration 
corresponding to the remaining time to the impact. 

Since the third sub-phase (after the knee strike and before the ground collision) is very short in 
the limit cycle, the nonlinear 'Hoo controller is applied only before the knee strike. If the biped 
robot leaves the basin of attraction after the knee strike, only the PD controllers are used until 
the ground collision, and then, the nonlinear 7-Loo controller is applied from this point until the 
next knee strike. 

4. Results 

In this section, it is presented the limit cycle for the bidimensional biped robot with feet de- 
scribed in Section 2 and the simulated results obtained from the implementation of the pro- 
posed hybrid control strategy. Using the Newton-Raphson method and considering a ground 
slope (p = 3°, the initial conditions to the limit cycle is given by 

x((p)=[n -1.30 -0.55 -3.89 1.52 -1.22 2.09 0.34 0.34 -1.33 ] T . 
The values used to find the solution, and the values used thorough this section, are 
K Pa = 150, K Da = 100, Kp 6 = 80 e K De = 10, 

for the gains of the PD controllers, and 6% = 80° and 0^ = 0°, for the desired joint positions. 
The reference position to the trunk, 6f, was selected closer to the human trunk position for a 
walking ahead movement. The foot rotation instant is properly adjusted through Kq and Km 
of the torsional spring on the ankle (2). For this case they were chosen as 

K = -10 and K M = 30. 

With the above values, it is found a walking cycle close to the human being with the foot 
rotation occurring after the swing leg to pass the normal to the ground surface and before 
the knee strike, which occurs just before the ground collision of the swing leg. The joint 
trajectories as function of the time are shown in Figure 4 and the limit cycles for the joints 
are shown in Figure 5, where each number in the limit cycles represents a pose of the robot 
during the step. These points are described below and shown in Figure 6, where the green leg 
is the support one and the red leg is the stance one: 

1. Beginning of the limit cycle: support leg in front of the swing leg; 

2. Intermediary point of the swing phase, before the foot rotation: support foot parallel to 
the ground; 

3. Beginning of the foot rotation around the toe; 

4. Intermediary point of the swing phase, before the knee strike: angle of the shank is 
negative (q$ < 0); 

5. Knee strike: angle of the shank is zero and the swing leg is straight; 

6. Collision of the swing foot with the ground: support leg in the back of the swing leg. 
The limit cycle found is stable. This characteristic can be verified computing the eigenval- 
ues of the Jacobian matrix, /, obtained at the last Newton-Raphson method iteration. It is 
observed that the eigenvalues of / are all within the unitary circle of the complex plane, show- 
ing the stability. However, the maximum absolute value of the eigenvalues of / is given by: 
max\A(J) | = 0,99411, that is, the limit cycle has a low convergence rate. 

224 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Time (s) 

0.2 0. 

Time (s) 

Fig. 4. Joint position and velocity time variations. 

4.1 Nonlinear %oo Control 

To apply the algorithm described in Section 3.1, the parameters p(x) are chosen as been the 
states representing only the position errors of the joints 2, 3, and 4 ( qi, %/ an d q±, respectively). 
This simplification is considered to alleviate the computational effort to find the solution for 
the set of LMIs (21). This is possible since the influence of the other states is small on the 
computation of the dynamic matrix A(q a ,q a ). Figure 7 shows the value of | \A(q a ,q a ) \ | for a 
variation of each joint within its operation range. Hence, m = 3 and: 

p(x) = [q 2 q 3 q±\ T . 

In order to find the solution for the LMIs, the compact set where the parameters vary is de- 
fined as p e [-0.3,0.3]™*/ x [-0A,0A}rad x [-0.8,0.8}rad and divided in (L = 3). Also the 
parameter variation rate is bounded by | p | < [1,5 2,0 3] rad/s. These values are obtained from 
the limit cycle. The basis functions for X(p) are selected as fi(p{x)) = 1 fi(p(x)) = cos{q2), 
fo(p(x)) — cos (^3) e f?>(p(x)) — cos(q^). The best attenuation level found was 7 = 1.5. 

4.2 Initial Conditions with Zero Velocities 

Since the limit cycle has small basin of attraction, the biped robot cannot reach the limit cycle 
on its own from initial conditions with zero velocities. To do this, it is used the control strategy 
proposed in Section 3.2. The nonlinear 'Hoo control is applied from the initial conditions to 
knee strike, considered as desired final position. After the knee strike, the PD and gravity 
compensation controllers are used. If at the beginning of the next step the initial conditions are 
again outside the basin of attraction, the procedure is repeated. To illustrate the effectiveness 
of the control strategy, consider the following initial conditions 

xq = [n 1.3 

0.6 

3.68 1.84 0} 1 

Nonlinear Hoc Control Applied to Biped Robots 

225 

'2.6 2.7 

2.8 2.9 

% (rad) 

: 1,2,3 

-0.5 

>^4 

-1.5 

-2 

^ 5 

6 ' 

1 

0.5 

4/ 

-0.5 

— T^.;.3 T 

'2^^^^'" \ 

i 

^Swl 

3 3.1 3.2 

-1.7 -1.65 -1.6 -1.55 -1.5 -1.45 -1.4 -1.35 -1.3 

q 2 (rad) 

-0.5 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.1 0.2 

q 3 (rad) 

-3.8 -3.6 -3.4 -3.2 -3 

q 4 (rad) 

-2.8 -2.6 -2.4 -2.2 

q 5 (rad) 

-1 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 

5 

: 

4 

3 

f 2 

& l 

^ 

6 

X 2 

| 

5 

-1 

1 

^^y^ 

- 

-2 

..... 

-3 

4 

1 

1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 

% (rad) 

Fig. 5. Joint phase planes. 

These initial conditions correspond to the legs be close to the normal to the ground surface and 
the feet be parallel to it. Figures 8 and 9 show the limit cycle trajectory for all joints and the 
joint position and velocity time variations. With the hybrid control strategy, the biped robot 

226 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig 

l r 1 

1 2 3 

6. Ilustration of the step in different moments. 

Fig. 7. Variation of \\A\\ with respect to the states. 

reached the limit cycle after three steps, with a smooth trajectory from the initial conditions to 
the first knee strike. This example shows the basin of attraction of the limit cycle was increased 
for beyond the initial conditions with zero velocities with the application of the nonlinear Hoo 
controller. 

4.3 Disturbance Rejection 

As seen before, the basin of attraction is small when only the PD and gravity compensation 
controllers are acting. Hence, even little disturbances can generate gait instability. In this 
section, the hybrid control strategy is used to give robustness against disturbances. In the 
example shown, the biped robot starts from the limit cycle initial condition, x((p), with only 
the PD and gravity compensation controllers. External disturbances composed of normal and 
sine functions, as described in (28), are applied to the variable robot joints. At tf = 0,1 s, 
occurs the maximum peak of the disturbance. 

Nonlinear Hoc Control Applied to Biped Robots 

227 

=S -i 

2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3 3.1 3.2 

q 1 (rad) 

0.5 
^ 

S-H 

or -0.5 

, 

-1.7 -1.6 -1.5 -1.4 -1.3 -1.2 

q 2 (rad) 

-0.6 -0.5 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 

q 3 (rad) 

0.5 

-0.5 

-1 

-4 -3.8 -3.6 -3.4 -3.2 -3 -2.8 -2.6 -2.4 -2.2 

% (rad) 

& l 
cr o 

-l 

-2 

5 
4 
3 

2 

/~\ 

/ 

"\ 

-1 

N 

jj> 

-2 

**rr 

-3 

. i i 

-1.2 -1 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 

q 5 (rad) 

1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2 2.4 

% (rad) 

Fig. 8. Phase plane of the limit cycles with zero inicial velocities. 

228 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Time (s) 

Time (s) 

Fig. 9. Joint position and velocities with zero inicial velocities. 

1 , * 

-(t-tf) 2 
0,24e 2a2 sin{7,2nt) 

-(t-tf) 2 
0,18e 2^2 sin(5Arct) 

-(t-t f ) 2 (28) 

0,12e 2^2 sin(3,6nt) 

-(t-tf) 2 
0,012e 2^2 sin(3,6nt) 

-(t-tf) 2 
_ 0,012e 2^2 sin(3,6nt) 

The value of C, the constant that indicates the basin of attraction size, is empirically obtained 
from simulations with different initial conditions. In this example, C = 0, 15. Figures 10 and 
11 show the results obtained. With the disturbance application, the robot leaves the basin of 
attraction at the beginning of the second step at t = 1, 25 s, instant where the control changes 
to the nonlinear Tioo controller. It is then computed the joint desired trajectory considering 
as desired final position the knee strike position, with duration time corresponding to the 
remaining time to the impact. Note that after the knee strike at the second step, the robot 
does not leave any more the basin of attraction and converges to the limit cycle. Hence, the 
nonlinear 'Hoo controller leads back the robot trajectory to the basin of attraction in only one 
step, showing the robustness of the adopted control strategy. Note also from Figure 11 that 
the trajectory performed by the robot during the nonlinear Tioo control application is close to 
the limit cycle trajectory. 

Nonlinear Hoc Control Applied to Biped Robots 

229 

=S -i 

-1.7 -1.6 

q 2 (rad) 

-1.3 -1.2 

-0.6 -0.5 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 

q 3 (rad) 

0.5 

-0.5 

-1 

-4 -3.8 -3.6 -3.4 -3.2 -3 -2.8 -2.6 -2.4 -2.2 

% (rad) 

/ 

^-~ 

^^_ 

- 

(( 

K 

\J 

- 

— - 

-1.2 -1 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 

q 5 (rad) 
Fig. 10. Phase plane with disturbance rejection. 

1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 

% (rad) 

5. Conclusions 

In this chapter, a stable limit cycle is found for a biped robot with torso, knees, and feet. 
However, the basin attraction is extremely small. To increase it, a control strategy based on 

230 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Time (s) 

Time (s) 

Fig. 11. Joint position and velocity time variations with disturbance rejection. 

nonlinear Tioo control and on a suitable choice of the switch point between the passive walking 
and the controlled trajectory is proposed. The results show that the basin of attraction is 
increased with the adopted strategy, for example, to beyond the initial conditions with zero 
velocities. In addition, system robustness is verified with the fast convergence to the stable 
gait, only one step, after the application of external torque disturbances. 

6. References 

Asano, R, Luo, Z.-W. & Yamakita, M. (2005). Biped gait generation and control based on a uni- 
fied property of passive dynamic walking, IEEE Transactions on Robotics 21(4): 754- 
762. 

Asano, F. & Yamakita, M. (2001). Virtual gravity and coupling control for robot gait synthesis, 
Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics 31(6): 737-745. 

Bhatia, G. & Spong, M. W. (2004). Hybrid control for smooth walking of a biped with knees 
and torso, Institute of Electrical and Eletronics Engineers Conference on Control Applica- 
tions, Taipei, Taiwan. 

Chevallereau, C, Abba, G., Aoustin, Y, Plestan, R, Westervelt, R. R., Canudas-de Wit, C. & 
Grizzle, J. W. (2003). Rabbit: A testbed for advanced control theory, IEEE Control 
Systems Magazine 23(5): 57-79. 

Choi, J. H. & Grizzle, J. W. (2005). Planar bipedal walking with foot rotation, Proceedings of the 
2005 American Conrtol Conference (ACQ, Portland, Oregon, USA. 

Goswani, A. (1999). Root rotation indicator (fri) point: A new gait planning tool to evaluate 
postural stability of biped robots, Proceedings of the 1999 IEEE International Conference 
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Detroit, Michigan, USA. 

Goswani, A., Thuilot, B. & Rspiau, B. (1998). A study of the passive gait of a compass-like 
biped robot, International Journal of Robotics Research 17(12): 1282-1301. 

Nonlinear Hoc Control Applied to Biped Robots 231 

Hirukawa, H., Kanehiro, R, Kaneko, K., Kajita, S., Fujiwara, K., Kawai, Y., Tomita, R, Hirai, 
S., Tanie, K., Isozumi, T., Akachi, K., Kawasaki, T., Ota, S., Yokoyama, K., Handa, 
H., Fukase, Y, Maeda, J., Nakamura, Y, Tachi, S. & Inoue, H. (2004). Humanoid 
robotics platforms developed in hrp, Robotics and Autonomous Systems 48(4): 165 - 
175. Humanoids 2003. 

Huang, Q., Yokoi, K., Kajita, S., Kaneko, K., Arai, H., Koyachi, N. & Tanie, K. (2001). Plan- 
ning walking patterns for a biped robot, IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation 
17(3): 280-289. 

McGeer, T. (1990). Passive dynamic walking, International Journal of Robotics Research 9(2): 62- 
82. 

Palmer, M. L. (2002). Sagittal Plane Characterization of Normal Human Ankle Function Across 
A Range Of Walking Gait Speeds, M.S. Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Department of Mechanical Engineering. 

Siqueira, A. A. G. & Terra, M. H. (2002). Control of underactuated manipulators using non- 
linear 'Hoo techniques, Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE Conference on Decision and Control 
(CDC), Las Vegas, Nevada, USA. 

Siqueira, A. A. G. & Terra, M. H. (2004). Nonlinear and markovian Hoo controls of underactu- 
ated manipulators, IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology 12(6): 811-826. 

Spong, M. W. & Bhatia, G. (2003). Further results on passivity based control of bipedal loco- 
motion, International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Las Vegas, USA. 

Vukobratovic, M. & Juricic, D. (1969). Contribution to the synthesis of biped gait, IEEE Trans- 
actions on Bio-Medical Engineering BM-16(1): 1-6. 

Westervelt, E. R., Grizzle, J. W. & Koditschek, D. E. (2003). Hybrid zero dynamics of planar 
biped walkers, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 48(1): 42-56. 

Wu, R, Yang, X. H., Packard, A. & Becker, G. (1996). Induced £2 _norm control for LPV systems 
with bounded parameter variation rates, International Journal of Robust and Nonlinear 
Control 6(9-10): 983-998. 

232 Climbing and Walking Robots 

14 

Method to Estimate the Basin of Attraction 

and Speed Switch Control 
for the Underactuated Biped Robot 

Yantao Tian 13 , Limei Liu 1 ' 2 , Xiaoliang Huang 1 , Jianf ei Li 1 and Zhen Sui 1 3 

1. School of Communication Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun ,130025, China 

2. Department of Mathematics, Changchun Taxation College, Changchun, 130117, China 

3.Key Laboratory of Bionics Engineering, Ministry of Education, Jilin University, Changchun, 

China 

1. Introduction 

The biped robots have higher mobility than conventional wheeled robots, especially when 
moving on rough terrains, up and down slopes and in environments with obstacles. The 
geometry of the biped robot is similar to the human beings, so it is easy to adapt to the 
human life environment and can help the human beings to finish the complex work. With 
the development of the society, the needs for robots to assist human beings with activities in 
daily environments are growing rapidly. Therefore, a large number of researches have been 
done on the bipedal walking. 

The dynamic system of the biped robot is a nonlinear hybrid dynamic system, which 
consists of continuous differential equations and discrete events dynamic maps. Therefore, 
this system is a complex nonlinear system. The most effective way of analyzing the global 
properties of the nonlinear system is probably the straightforward numerical evaluation to 
compute the motions and then to infer some global properties from the numerical results. It 
has been reported that the passive biped robot has weak tolerance for large disturbances. 
The basin of attraction is widely used as a measure for the disturbance rejection for the 
biped robots, and it is a total set of state variables from which the walker can walk 
successfully (Ning, L. et. al., 2007). The larger the size of the basin of attraction is, the 
stronger the stability is. Therefore, more and more researchers have studied the methods to 
compute the basin of attraction for the biped robot. The cell mapping method was proposed 
to compute the basin of attraction for the simplest walking model with point feet and the 
planar model with round feet (Schwab, A.L. & Wisse, M., 2001); (Ning, L. et. al, 2007). The 
results of experiments show that this method is effective; however, it is time-consuming for 
multidimensional state space (Zhang, P., et. al., 2008). Based on the bionics study, most 
humanoid robot control methods are in terms of the basic principles and characteristics of 
hominine gait. A robotic simulacrum potentially can be very useful. The passive biped robot 
can walk down along the slope only by inertial and gravitational force. But this passive 
walking has weak robust and stability. The basin of attraction of the simplest walker can 
only tolerate a deviation of 2% from the fixed point (Schwab, A.L. & Wisse, M., 2001). In 

234 Climbing and Walking Robots 

order to improve the stability of the biped robot and expand the size of the basin of 
attraction, most researchers have designed the controller on the biped robot. Powered robots 
based on the concept of the passive biped robot can walk on a level floor by ankle push-off 
(Tedrake, R., et. al, 2004) or hip actuation(Wisse, M., 2004). S.H. Collins exploited the robot 
with only ankles actuators (Collins, S.H & Ruina A., 2005). M. Wisse exploited the robot 
with pneumatic actuators (Wisse, M. & Frankenhuyzen, J.van, 2003). Ono proposed the self- 
excited control with hip joint (Ono, K. et. al., 2004). Since the number of the input torques of 
these robots is less than the freedom degree, they are called the underactuated biped robot. 
Compared with traditional biped robots such as Asimo, the underactuated biped robot has 
higher energy efficiency (Garcia, M., et. al., 1998). Goswami have carried out the extensive 
simulation analyses of the stability of the underactuated biped walker. However, the biped 
robots are expected not only to walk steadily, but also to walk fast. How to accelerate the 
biped walking has attracted a number of researchers during the last years. Energy shaping 
control law was proposed by Mark Spong for the non-linear hybrid system. J.K. Holm and 
others applied the law to two passive-dynamic bipeds: the compass-like biped and a simple 
biped with torso (Jonathan, K. Holm, et. al., 2007). As the compensation for the self-gravity 
effects, the robot can get different speeds and different stable limit cycles. The angular 
velocity is changed with changing the gravity compensation coefficient; but step length can 
not be changed. Based on this study, we eventually develop a method to accelerate the 
speed of the kneed biped robot and analyze the changes of potential energy and kinetic 
energy during this process. 

The chapter is organized as follows. In section 2, poincare-like-alter-cell-to-cell mapping 
method is presented for estimating the basin of attraction of the biped robot. This method is 
based on the theories of the cell mapping and the point-to-point mapping. Based on the 
theory of the cell mapping, a method to find the fixed point of Poincare map for the biped 
robot is proposed. The basin of attraction for the biped robot with knees is estimated with 
this method. The effects of parameters variation on the basin of attraction are discussed. 
Simulations and experiments will be introduced. In section 3, the speed switch control is 
introduced for the biped robot with knees, and the transformation of potential energy and 
kinetic energy is analyzed in the control process. The relationship between the control 
parameters and the forward speed is obtained by simplifying and analyzing the model of 
the kneed passive walker. In section 4, the conclusion will be presented. 

2. Method to estimate the basin of attraction for the biped robot 

In this section, we introduce a new method to estimate the basin of attraction of the biped 
robot. This method is called Poincare-like-alter-cell-to-cell mapping method, which is 
guided by the method proposed by (Liu, L. et. al., 2008). Poincare-like-alter-cell-to-cell 
mapping method can not only be used to estimate the basin of attraction of the biped robot, 
but also can be used to estimate the fixed point of the Poincare map. And then, the effects of 
the configurable parameters on the basin of attraction are discussed. In experiments, a kneed 
biped robot with point feet is used; and the effect on the basin of attraction is obtained with 
the variation of the mass ratio between the thigh and the shank. Results show that the size of 
the basin of attraction is enlarged with increasing the ratio. 

Method to Estimate the Basin of Attraction 

and Speed Switch Control for the Underactuated Biped Robot 235 

2.1 Cell mapping 

We will introduce some concepts and terminology of the cell mapping. Firstly, a domain of 

interest Q^R N in the state space is chosen. Let the coordinate axis of a state 
variable x i (i=\,2,-,N) of this domain be divided into a large number of intervals with an 

interval size h t . The total number of the intervals on the x- -axis of the domain of interest is 
denoted by n i . The interval Z- of the x. -axis is defined to be one which contains 
all x t satisfying a t 4- (Zj-i) • h t < x t < a t 4- Z- • h t , where a f is the smallest value of the x t -axis of 
this domain. Z- is a positive integer. An N-tuple Z- (i=\,2,---,N) is called a cell vector of the state 
space and is denoted by z . All the cell vectors constitute a cell space, and the total number 
of cells is n « . . A pointx = (jc i5 jc 2 -- -,jc w ) belongs to a cell z = iz l ,z 2 ,--,z N ) , if x- belongs to a 

cell Z f for all i . Each cell is now considered as an entity and the state space is regarded as a 
collection of cells. So with this procedure, the continuous state space is replaced by a 
discrete cell space. The evolution of the cell z(ri) can be described by z(n 4- 1) = C(z(n)) , that 
is Z i (n+i) = C(z i ( n )) (i=i,2,--,N) , where C map a set of positive integers to a set of positive 
integers. Obviously, this mapping is called a cell-to-cell mapping, or a cell mapping. 
Let C m denote the cell mapping C applied m times with C° understood to be the identity 
mapping. A sequence of K distinct cells Z *(j)(j=i,2,---,K) that satisfy 

z*(m + i) = C m ( z *(i)),m = l,2,--,K-l 
*(i) = C K ( 2 *(i)) (1) 

are said to form a periodic motion of period K . They are called aP-K motion. And each of 

its elements z *(j) is called a periodic cell of period K or simple a P- K cell. 

A cell z* is called equilibrium cell, if it satisfies z* = C[ z *) • 

A cell z is said to be transient cell which is "r-step removed from aP-K motion ,r , if r is the 

minimum positive integer such that C r (z) = z *{j) , where z *(j) is one of the P- K cells of that 

P- K motion. In other words, z is mapped after r-steps into one of the P- K cells of the P- 

K motion and any further mapping will lock the evolution of the system in the P- K motion. 

The set of all cells which are r-steps removed from aP-I motion is called the " r-step 

domain of attraction" for that P- K motion. 

For most physical problems once the state variable exceeds a certain scope of the domain of 

interest, none is interested in the further evolution of the variable. If the range of the state 

variable exceeds the ones that are interested, then the cell lying in it is called sink cell. Once 

the cell is sink cell, none is interested in its further evolution. That is to say that the region 

outside the domain of interest constitutes a collection of the sink cells. 

It is obviously that the total number of cells is always finite, although the total number could 

be usually huge. The evolution of the system starting with any regular cell z can lead to only 

three possible outcomes: periodic cell, sink cell and transient cell (Hsu, C.S., 1980). 

236 Climbing and Walking Robots 

2.2 Method to find the fixed point of Poincare map for the biped robot 

On the basis of the theory of the fixed point of the Poincare map, we have analyzed the 
stability of the biped robot. Starting from the given point, if the gaits converge to the limit 
cycle that starts from the fixed point, we can say that the given point is a stable initial state 
and the robot can walk stably. But it is difficult to find the fixed point of the Poincare map. 
The common method is Newton-Raphson iteration method. However, the initial values of 
the iteration have to be guessed in experience. If the initial values are not close enough to 
the fixed point, the iteration can not converge. Coleman and Garcia have made failure in 
finding the stable fixed point for 3D model with the Newton-Raphson iteration method 
(Garcia, M., 1999; Coleman, M.J., 1998). 

Based on the theory of cell mapping, we propose a new method to find the fixed point of the 
Poincare map. Firstly, we choose an initial condition state space at random. And the initial 
condition state space will be subdivided into cell states with feasible interval sizes. Then we 

obtain periodic cells under the cell mapping. All center points x' ^ of the periodic cells are 
selected together. Each center point X" ' of the periodic cell is looked as the inital point of 
iteration. The iteration evolution of x^ ^ is as follows: let x' = x' \ x" = P(x') , where P is a 
Poincare map. Let x' = x" , and calculate the above Poincare map repeatedly, x" = P(x') is a 
fixed point of the Poincare map of the biped robot, if P(V) — x'\ < £ . That is to 
say x" — P(x r ) . The effective initial value of iteration can be obtained easily with this method. 
This method is still effective in the multidimensional state space. 

2.3 Poincare-like-alter-cell-to-cell mapping method 

The system that is considered in this section is 

' X = f(x) X£S 

< x + =H(x) xeS 
S = {x\r(x) = 0} 

The steps of estimating the basin of attraction for the biped robot are listed as follows: 
Stepl. The state space is divided into a discrete cell space. 

A domain of interest Q cz r n in the state space is chosen. The coordinate axis of the state 
variable x. (1=1,2,. ••,#) of this domain is divided into a large number of intervals with an 

interval size h\ i . The total number of the intervals is denoted by w. . The interval Z- of the x t - 

axis is defined to be one which contains all x. satisfying 

a { + {zi -1) • h\ { < x { < a { + Z { • hl { (2) 

Where a { is the smallest value of the x i -axis of this domain. So the cell vector z of this 

domain is denoted by an N-tuple Z- (1=1,2, ■■■,n) . All the cell vectors constitute a cell space, and 

JV 
the total number of cells is n «. . 

Method to Estimate the Basin of Attraction 

and Speed Switch Control for the Underactuated Biped Robot 237 

Step2. The cell space is classified by the evolution of the cell. 

(l)Let n-\ , choosing a cell z(n) ( Z t (n) (/=i,2,--,tv) ), x' \n) is its center point, 

where x> ' (n) = a t + (z / («)-i/2) • h\ i . z(n) is called an original cell. 

(2) Let x = x^ ' (n) is the initial point of x = f(x) at t = . Then the trajectory of this equation 
is calculated with initial point x . The original cell is a sink cell, if x(t e ) satisfies r[x(t e )) = , 
and the evolution of cell is stopped. If r[x(t e )) = , x + =H(x(t e )) . Then z(n + 1) = C(z(n)) , that 

Z i (n + i) = C i (z i{ n)) = Int\\\-^ + n (3) 

hlj 2 

where Int(y) denotes the largest integer which is not bigger than y . One can obtain the new 
cell z(n + 1) . 

(3) If the state value in which z(n 4- 1) lies exceeds the domain of interest of the state space, 
the original cell is a sink cell and the evolution of cell is stopped. 
Otherwise z(n) and z(n + l) are compared. The evolution of the cell is ended, 
if z(n) = z(n + l) , and the original cell is an equilibrium cell. When z(n)&z(n+i) , 
let x Q = x + and one does repetitive operation of (2) and (3), until the new cell is equal to one 
of the cells that get from the evolution of z(n) previously. In the end, the original cell is a 

periodic cell or a transient cell that is r-step removed from a P-K motion. 
Every cell of the cell space must carry out the procedure of the evolution. 
Step3. Almost basin of attraction is obtained 

Every sink cell is divided into many intervals with an interval size/^ (i=i,2,---,N) . Every 
equilibrium cell and periodic cell and transient cell are divided into a lot of intervals with an 
interval size/^ (i=\,2,---,N) , where Kh i is much smaller than/^-. Then the total number of 

cells in the cell space is much larger. All center points of the cells are picked out. They 

constitute an almost basin of attraction of the biped robot. 

Step4. Filter step-obtaining the basin of attraction 

Since the division of the cell space affects the accuracy of the results, we set this step. Let the 

fixed point be a reference point. Every point x' ' of the almost basin of attraction is 
imposed x" = P(x') repeatedly. The point belongs to the basin of attraction, if it is close to the 
fixed point under the calculations. 

2.4 Basin of attraction for the biped robot with knees 

2.4.1 Model of the biped robot with knees 

In this section, the goal is to estimate the basin of attraction for the biped robot with knees 
with the Poincare-like-alter-cell-to-cell mapping method. Here we focus on the biped robot 
which could go down incline by using potential energy. This robot does not have a torso 
and consists of two point feet and two legs that are connected at the hip joint. Each leg has a 

238 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

thigh and a shank connected at a passive knee joint that has a knee stopper. By the knee 
stopper, an angle of the knee rotation is restricted like the human knee. The thigh and the 
shank of the swing leg are assumed to be kept straight by the knee stopper during a period 
from the knee collision to the end of the heelstrike. Fig. 1 shows the diagram of the model of 
the biped robot with knees (Vanessa, F.& Hsu Chen, 2007). Table 1 lists the physical 
parameters and the values in simulation. 

Symbols 

Parameter 

Value in Simulation 

mH 

The hip mass [kg] 

0.5 

ml 

The shank mass [kg] 

0.05 

m2 

The thigh mass [kg] 

0.5 

al 

Length between the heel and the shank 
COG of the swing leg [m] 

0.375 

bl 

Length between the knee and the shank 
COG of the swing leg [m] 

0.125 

a2 

Length between the knee and the thigh 
COG of the stance leg [m] 

0.175 

b2 

Length between the hip and the thigh 
COG of the stance leg [m] 

0.325 

L 

Leg length [m] 

0.5 

* 

The slope of ground [radian] 

0.0504 

a 

Interleg angle [radian] 

0.4772 

Table 1. The physical parameters and the values in simulation 

The entire step cycle is divided into four processes: 

(1) The stance leg straightens out and the knee is locked, just like a single link. While the 
swing leg with unlock knee comes forward, just like two links connected by a 
frictionless joint. This stage is called unlocked swing stage. 

(2) When the swing leg straightens out, the knee of swing leg is locked. The knees tr ike 
occures. The impact takes place instantaneously. 

(3) After the kneestrike, the knee of swing leg remains locked and the system switchs to 
the double-link pendulum dynamics. Therefore, this stage is just like the swing stage of 
the compass gait model. This stage is called locked swing stage. 

(4) The locked-knee swing leg hits the ground. The premises underlying this stage are that: 
the impact takes place instantaneously; the impact of the swing leg with the ground is 
assumed to be inelastic and without sliding; the tip of the support leg is assumed not to 
be slip, and the robot behaves as a ballistic double-pendulum. 

Method to Estimate the Basin of Attraction 

and Speed Switch Control for the Underactuated Biped Robot 

239 

Fig. 1. Model of the biped robot with knees (Vanessa, F. & Hsu Chen, 2007) 

Figure 2 shows the diagram of the four stages of the entire step cycle. Equations of the entire 
step cycle are shown in (Zhang, P. et. al., 2009). 

Stage I Stage II stage HI 

Fig. 2. Diagram of the four stages of the entire gait cycle 

Stage IV 

2.4.2 Finding the fixed point of the Poincare map for the biped robot with knees 

A passive biped robot with knees is chosen to do experiment. The values of parameters are 
listed in Table 1 and all of the input torques are zero. The instant just after heelstrike is 
defined as the Poincar section. Let the initial condition state spaces be respectively 
[0,0.8]x[-2,0]x[-2,0]x[-5,10]x[-3,0]x[-3,0] and [-0.8,0]x [-l,2]x [-l,2]x [-5,10]x [-3,0]x [-3,0] • 
Each state space is subdivided into five equal division. The fixed point is found to be [0.1882 
-0.2890 -0.2890 -1.1090 -0.0571 -0.0571] by using the method proposed in this chapter, 
though the initial condition state spaces are different. Figure 3 presents a limit cycle for the 
thigh of the swing leg starting from this fixed point. In figure 3, the instantaneous angle 
velocity changes from the kneestrike and heelstrike are expressed as the straight lines in the 
limit cycle, while the angles remain the same. Figure 4 shows that the gaits of the biped 
robot will converge to this limit cycle within a few steps, if the initial state starts slightly 
away from this fixed point. [0.1982 -0.2890 -0.2890 -0.0590 -0.0571 -0.0571] is marked as 
a blue star, and the fixed point is marked as a red star. Therefore, the biped robot with knees 

240 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

can walk stably. This experiment shows that the method to find the fixed point of Poincare 
map for the biped robot is effective and the result of the method does not rely on the initial 
condition state space. The initial state of the iterations is not to be guessed. 

Fig. 3. Limit cycle of the thigh of the swing leg starting from [0.1882 -0.2890 -0.2890 
-1.1090 -0.0571 -0.0571] 

Fig. 4. Limit cycle of the thigh of the swing leg starting from [0.1982 -0.2890 -0.2890 
-0.0590 -0.0571 -0.0571] 

2.4.3 Estimate the basin of attraction for the biped robot with knees 

In simulations, the basin of attraction of the biped robot with knees is estimated with the 
Poincar -like-alter-cell-to-cell mapping method. The instance just after heelstrike is set to 
be the Poincar section, so the state space satisfies q =q -^q =q . In order to reduct 

dimensions, the interleg angle is fixed to be the fixed point's inter leg angle. That is to say 
-Q 2 be equal to the fixed point's interleg angle. The values of parameters in simulation are 

listed in tablel. The feasible state space is set as 

6 X e [0,0.4772]/ 6 2 e [-0.4772,0]/^ e [-4,l]/<9 2 e [- 5,1 1] - Each state space is subdivided into 80000 
cells. Every periodic cell and transient cell are divided into 20 cells, and every sink cell is 
divided into 4 cells. Figure 5 shows the sections of this basin of attraction. In order to ensure 
accuracy, time-consuming is inevitable for the cell mapping method. Therefore, compared 
with the cell mapping method, the advantages of Poincare-like-alter-cell-to-cell mapping 
method are that this method is more accuracy and saves time. 

Method to Estimate the Basin of Attraction 

and Speed Switch Control for the Underactuated Biped Robot 

241 

Angular velocity of 

Angular velocity of stance leg(rad/s) 

Fig. 5. The sections of the basin of attraction of the biped robot with knees 

2.4.4 Effect on the basin of attraction with parameters variation 

In this section, we will do research in the effect on the basin of attraction of the biped robot 
with knees, when the mass ratio in each leg is varied. Let total mass of each leg be 0.55 [kg], 
and ju denotes the ratio between the mass of the thigh and the mass of the shank. Figure 6 
shows the variations of the basin of attraction of the biped robot with knees, when ju is 
increased. It presents that the size of the basin of attraction becomes larger with 
increasing ju . Most of the points lying in the basin of attraction assemble in the 
neighborhood of the fixed points. Since the basin of attraction of the biped robot with knees 
is a collection of the initial state points that lead to the perpetual walking, the size of the 
basin of attraction determines the disturbance rejection of the stable gaits. From the results 
of this simulation, it is proved that the greater ju is, the stronger roboustness is. And it 
further proved that the greater the ratio between the mass of the thigh and the mass of the 
shank was, the more stable the walker became ((Vanessa, F.& Hsu Chen, 2007). 

Angular velocity of stance leg(rad/s) 

Angular of stance leg(rad) 

242 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Angular velocity of stance leg(rad/s) 

10 

I 8 

2, 

5? 6 

9 

I 4 

! 2 
■55 
t 

1 -2 

1 1 1 1 
u=15l I I I I 

: 

J 

! M 

- - - * J - %: "•' 'L^ti^l 

'•tjs^iaSII 

^2H 

j i i JW?*^ j 

i i i i 

i j • :• 

_i i j 

-3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0.5 

Angular velocity of stance leg(rad/s) 

Angular velocity of stance leg(rad/s) 

Angular of stance leg(rai 

Angular velocity of stance leg(rad/s) 

1 1 1 1 
u=40 1 1 1 1 1 | 

J&* 

1 ' : i 

1 ■ 

j? 6 

o 
o" 2 

1 . 1 • Mill 

« ° 

JH H' 

< -2 

lPlr!r* 

! ! ! ■ 

-3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0.5 1 

Angular velocity of stance leg(rad/s) 

-3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0.5 1 

Angular velocity of stance leg(rad/s) 

Fig. 6. Variations of the basin of attraction of the biped robot with knees with ju ( ju is set to 
be 1, 15, 40, 300 respectively) 

3. Speed switch control for the biped robot 

Now that the basins of attraction in the stable limited cycle is obtained in the last part, 
control methods based on calculation of the basin of attraction can be carried into execution. 
In this section, a speed switch control algorithm for the biped robot model is designed, 
based on the energy shaping theory and the estimate of the basin of attraction, to accelerate 
the dynamic walking and regulating the speed of walking when the parameters are varied. 
In order to keeping the gaits stable in accelerating process, we design a switch rule based on 
distinguishing the position of the switch point in the phase space. If the switch point lies in 

Method to Estimate the Basin of Attraction 

and Speed Switch Control for the Underactuated Biped Robot 

243 

the common pats of the basins of attraction which is belong to the stable limited cycle in 
different speeds, the walking speed can be adjusted only by changing the grave parameter 
to objective value directly. Otherwise, a transition function based on the equational 
constraint condition is necessary to be constructed. 

First of all, the functional relationship between the control parameters and the forward 
speed is analyzed which is used to construct the speed switch control algorithm. Then the 
speed swith control algorithm is introduced in detail and the effects on the forward speed 
and the walking gaits under control are studied. In the end, the trends of the kinetic energy 
and the potential energy are analyzed with control parameters variations during the 
controlled walking. 

Switch point 

Fig. 7. Respective postures of the biped robot with knees during controlled walking stage 

3.1 Stable walking and gravity parameter 

3.1.1 Relationship between forward speed and gravity parameter 

Energy shaping control law was proposed by Mark Spong for the non-linear hybrid system. 

Holm and others applied the law to the simple biped with torso (Jonathan K. Holm. et. al., 

2007). 

Based on this method, we calculate the relationship between the average speed v and 

gravity parameter / ,and showed in the eqution (4) 

f go £(sin(g,(0)) + sin(g 2 (0))) 

(4) 

where / is defined as the gravity parameter, which is the proportional coefficient of the 
gravity: f = g / g , g =9.8m/ s 2 > v is the average speed of each gait cycle, #(0) is the initial 
angle values of the stance leg and Q (0) is the initial angle values of the swing leg. Also we 

244 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

can get the different stable limit cycles that means different walking speeds due to the 
different initial values with the compensation for the self-gravity effects as below. 
Fig. 9 shows that the limit cycle stretches in the vertical direction with increasing the value 
of / . This experiment indicates that the angular velocity is changed, but the step length 
holds in line when changing/ . Fig.10 shows the curve of (# i? # 29 # 3 )and V 2 ,0 3 for the 
different value of / . 

Fig. 9. The limit cycle corresponding to different value of / ( / is 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 respectively) 

□ o 

Fig. 10. Angular displacement and angular velocity corresponding to different value of / 
( / is 1, 3, 5, 7 respectively) 

3.1.2 Energy analysis for different gravity parameter 

Expressions of the kinetic energy and the potential energy for the biped robot with knees are 
showed as the equation (5) and (6). 

P(6) = [(m H +77^+77^ )gL cos 6 1 +m l ga l cos 6 1 
+m 2 g(l 1 +fl2)cos65 -{m]o 2 +m i l 2 )g cos 2 
-^hg\^os0 3 ]f(t) 

(5) 

Method to Estimate the Basin of Attraction 

and Speed Switch Control for the Underactuated Biped Robot 

245 

K(G,0) =-m H L 2 6f +i(ra 1 a 1 2 +m 2 (l 1 +a 2 f)% 

1 . 

+-m 1 (fc 1 2 6£ +/ 2 6f +l}$)+m l b 1 l 1 3 1 cos(0 3 -6 1 ) 

2 ' ~ ' ~ ( 6 ) 
- rnfiJJ)^ cos(65 -0 3 )- m^JM^ cos(6^ - 2 ) 

+-ra 2 (fr 2 # 2 +L 2 tf -2fe 2 L44cos(^ -0 2 )) 

With the analysis of energy evaluation, it can be seen that the mechanical energy as well as 
the kinetic and potential energy changes in a similar manner. From Fig. 11, at the swing 
stage, mechanical energy is conserved, showd nearly as level lines in the fingure. The curves 
of kinetic energy with different / have similar variation which simply decrease to the 
minimum value and then rise up, compensating the energy loss at kneestrike. The same 
trend can also be seen in the figure of potential energy. 

w 100 

| 80 

CL 

B0 
40 

■' "■■■■■ \ i *****•>... 

- 4 i f — t— j i 

8 
6 
4 
2 

8 
6 
4 
2 

Kinetic Energy 

\ v \ \ -i \ - 

I i I j. lw *«*.-.[ _ 

;;;;;; 

Time ( S ) 

Fig. 11. The variation of potential energy and the variation of kinetic energy corresponding 
to different value of / ( / is 1, 3, 5, 7 respectively) 

3.2 Construction of the control law 

From the last part, we can get the basin of the attraction for different stable limit cycles, 
which represents different walking speeds. If we want to switch the gait from one stable 
limit cycle into another, we should determine whether the switch point (the initial position 
under control) lies in the common part of the two basins of attraction or not. In general, the 
point of heelstrike is chosen as the switch point and the changes of touch sensors are 
examined as the controlling signals. Also this piont is the fixed point in the stable limited 
cycle as we know from section 2. 

Since different speeds corresponds to the different gravity parameters / , the speed switch 
control method is mainly based on the gravity parameter. The speed switch controller is 
designed as 

246 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

(7) 

] T r l r+ B{ q )u = {l-f{t))g{q) 

= (1-/(0) 8ug if g 3 T 
When the controller is carried out, we only need to adjust the value of / . 

Letx = (q ,q ) the basin of attraction related to/] is denoted as follows (Liu, L.., et. al., 
2008) 

4=* 

3 T >0, 
si flft,0, Vj fD=* 

(i=U) 

(8) 

Where f { is the gravity parameter, and x* is the fixed point of the Poincare return map for 
the biped robot with knees, that is P(x*) = x* . 

(1) If the switch point x lies in the common part of LZ 1 and U 2 , / can be turn to f 2 from f t 
directly. Since the switch point in the basin of attraction U 2 , the stable gait in the high speed 
related to f 2 will be obtained again after a few steps. 

(2) If the switch point x does not lie in the common part of U 1 and U 2 , we construct a 
transition function f(t) to finish the switch. Considering f(t) = a + a x t + a 2 t 2 , a a x and U 2 are 

the coefficients parameters. Table 2 gives some necessary signals to estimate the coefficient 
parameters. 

fi 

The initial value of / 

fe 

The final value of / 

*f 

The transition time 

T 

The stable gaits period 

Table 2. The signals used to deduce /(f) 

The transition function /(f) should satisfy the conditions as follows 

/,(0) = / ( 

/,(*-/) = /• 
■ J/,(0)* = 

(9) 

In our simulation experiment, the coefficient of f(t) are listed as follows ( f. = f , f = f ) 

<*0 = fl 

a 1 = (/ 2 - a - a 2 t_ f 2 ) 

* — f 

^[6T - 6a t _ .- 3a t t _/ 2 ) 

Method to Estimate the Basin of Attraction 

and Speed Switch Control for the Underactuated Biped Robot 

247 

The transition function of f(t) is designed as follows: 

/(H 9 

/1+/2 2T 

^J^-MM^l 

3T 2/ 1+ / 2 

+6 

^_2^, //+/ ; 

/1+/2 2T 

(10) 

3.3 Simulation experiments 

In order to verify the validity of the speed switch control for the biped robot with knees, a 
model has been described by visual software. Fig. 12 shows the simulation model. The 
values of the structure parameters have been given in Table 1. 

Fig. 12. Visual simulation model of dynamic biped robot with knees 

We choose the fixed ponit of the gait cycle as the switch initial position of our algorithm. 
Fig. 13 shows the basins of the attraction in the fixed points of the limit cycles, which are 
obtained by the method when the gravity parameter is equal to 2 and 3 respectively. We 
named the basin (red part ) U 2 when / =2, and the basin (blue part ) u when / =3. We can 

see the common parts of the two basins clearly. And the green points is the fixed points, 
which are used for the beginning points of the switch process. 

Fig. 13. The basins of attraction for the biped robots with different gravity parameters 

248 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

The parameters of transition function are set as f = 2, f = 3 , f = 0.5 an d T=ll, which means 

the speed can change from 1.3466 times to 2.1130 times of the original speed within 0.5s, and 
the variable of transition function begins withy^ =2 and ends with f =3. 

Fig. 14 lists the variation of the hip angular velocity in one step. Fig. 15 shows the change 
process of the hip angular velocity with changing f(t), which indicates the angular velocity 

began to accelerate in the second step, and then the biped robot walked fast and stably after 
the fifth step. 

~ 1 

> 

< -1 

i ' '■ r with i control i i 

\ \j ! without j control 

0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 

time ( s) 

Fig. 14. The hip angular velocity with f(t) compare to the hip angular velocity without f(t) in 
one step 

3 

£" 2 

fe -1 

f -2 

||||j||||j|: 

12 3 4 5 6 

time ( s) 

Fig. 15. The hip angular velocity corresponding to/(t)in several steps (begin with f 1 =2 and 
end with f 2 =3) 

Method to Estimate the Basin of Attraction 

and Speed Switch Control for the Underactuated Biped Robot 

249 

Potential Energy 

Fig. 16. The variation of potential energy and kinetic energy using the transition function f(t) 
(f(t) transits from 2 to 3) 

The energy transformation is different from original when the forward speed is controlled. 
Fig.16 show the potential energy and kinetic energy with different value of/ . Obviously, 

with increasing of the values of control parameter, the speed of the kinetic energy and the 
potential energy transformation raises proportionally. However, the variable range of the 
kinetic energy is larger than potential energy, because that the energy supplied by the 
control torques compensates the kinetic energy and accelerates the dynamic walking. With 
the gravity potential energy shaping, the kneed biped trajectory converges to a high energy 
limit cycle in one to three steps depending on the transition function /(f) . Fig.16 present the 
variation process with the energy explanation variation graph, which is indicated that the 
trajectory after each step moves closer to the limit cycle on which the energy is high and 
stable. 

250 Climbing and Walking Robots 

4. Conclusion 

In this chapter, we introduce a new method to estimate the basin of attraction for the biped 
robot and a speed switch control algorithm to change its walking speed. The method which 
is called Poincare-like-alter-cell-to-cell mapping proposed in this chapter can also be used as 
a tool to estimate the basin of attraction of the hybrid system. Then a research about the law 
of controlling the walking speed based on energy shaping and the estimate of the basin of 
attraction for the underactuated kneed dynamic walker is carried out, which can change the 
walking speed smoothly. Simulation tests are done to verify the validity of these methods. 

We make a brief conclusion about the main works as follows 

1) The robustness of the biped robot can be justified by the size of the basin of attraction 
that can be obtained by Poincare-like-alter-cell-to-cell mapping method. 

2) Poincare-like-alter-cell-to-cell mapping method has more accuracy, and it is not time- 
consuming. 

3) Fixed point of the Poincare map for the biped robot can be easily found with our method 
which is also used as an initial parameter in the proposed control algorithm. 

4) Based on this speed switch control, the speed of the dynamic walking robot can be 
adjusted easily. 

5) The description of the kinetic energy and potential energy and the visual simulation 
model can be used as effective tools for the analysis and control of our model. 

The work in our near future study as below 

1) Using this method to estimate the stability of more complex dynamic models, especially 
the dynamic walking robot whose locomotion is in the three dimensional space. And 
obtaining its stable initial state is a tough work. 

2) Optimizing the speed switch algorithm and the switch function to obtain the time- 
optimized and energy-optimized trajectory in the controlled gait. 

3) Researching for new mathematical tools to give the basin of the attraction more 
elaborated description. Meanwhile reducing the computational work in solving process is 
also a pressing problem. 

5. Acknowledgment 

This work is supported by National High Technology Research and Development Program 
of China (863 Program), grant No.2006AA04Z251; National Natural Science Foundation of 
China, grant No.60974067; the Science and Technology Development Program of Jilin 
Province, grant No: 20070524. 

6. References 

Ning, L.; Junfeng, L. & Tianshu, W.(2007). The effects of parameter variation on the basins of 
attraction of passive walking models. Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers Computer Society, Piscataway, NJ 08855-1331, United States, Harbin, 
China, pp. 1908-1913 

Method to Estimate the Basin of Attraction 

and Speed Switch Control for the Underactuated Biped Robot 251 

Schwab, A.L. & Wisse, M. (2001). Basin of attraction of the simplest walking model. In: 18th 

Biennial Conference on Mechanical Vibration and Noise. American Society of 

Mechanical Engineers, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, pp. 531-539 
Zhang, P.; Tian, Y., Liu, Z. & Yang, S. (2008). Further Research and Comparison of Gaits for 

Compass-like Biped and Kneed Passive Dynamic Walker. 2008ICIRA-International 

Conference on intelligent Robotics and Application. 
Tedrake, R.; Zhang, T.W. & Fong, M.F., Seung, H.S. (2004). Actuating a simple 3D passive 

dynamic walker. In: 2004 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 

Automation. IEEE Press, Piscataway, New Orleans, LA, United States, pp.4656-4661 
Wisse, M. (2004). Three additions to passive dynamic walking; actuation, an upper body, 

and 3D stability. In: 2004 4th IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid 

Robots. IEEE Press, New York, Santa Monica, CA, United States, pp. 113-132 
Collins, S.H & Ruina A. (2005). A bipedal walking robot with efficient and human-like gait, 

Proceeding of IEEE International Conference of Robotics and Automation, 

Barcelona, Spain, Bipedal Locomotion I, CD-ROM No. 1935 
Wisse, M. & Frankenhuyzen, J. van (2003). Design and construction of MIKE; a 2d 

autonomous biped based on passive dynamic walking, Proceeding of Conference 

of Adaptive Motion of Animals and Machines, Kyoto, Japan, Analysis & Control of 

Bipedal Locomotion, CD-ROM 
Ono, K.; Furuichi, T. & Takahashi, R. (2004). Self-Excited Walking with Feet, International 

Journal of Robotics Research, Vol. 23, No. 1, pp. 55-68 
Garcia, M.; Chatterjee, A. & Ruina, A. (1998). Speed, efficiency, and stability of small-slope 2- 

D passive dynamic bipedal walking. In: Proceedings of the 1998 IEEE International 

Conference on Robotics and Automation. Part 3 (of 4). IEEE Press, Piscataway, 

Leuven, Belgium, pp. 2351-2356 
Jonathan K. Holm; Dongjun Lee & Mark W. Spong (2007). Time-Scaling Trajectories of 

Passive-Dynamic Bipedal Robots, Pro IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation, 

Rome, Italy, pp. 3603-3608. 
Liu, L.; Tian, Y. & Huang, X. (2008). A Method to Estimate the Basin of Attraction of System 

with Impulse Effects: Application to the Biped Robot, International Conference on 

Intelligent Robotics and Applications, Wuhan, China. 
Hsu, C.S.(1980) A Theory of Cell-to-Cell Mapping Dynamical Systems. Journal of Applied 

Mechanics, vol. 47, pp. 931-939 
Garcia, M.(1999). Stability, scaling, and chaos in passive-dynamic gait models. Ithaca, New 

York: Cornell University 
Coleman, M.J. (1998). A stability study of a three-dimensional passive-dynamic model of 

human gait. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University 
Vanessa, F. & Hsu Chen (2007). Passive Dynamic Walking with Knees: A Point Foot Model. 

Submitted to the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science on 

February 2, pp. 21-28 
Zhang, P.; Zhang, D., Tian, Y. & Liu, Z. (2009). Dynamic Modeling and Stability Analysis of 

Passive Biped Robot. Journal of Beijing University of Technology, vol. 35, No. 2, 

pp. 258-263 

252 Climbing and Walking Robots 

15 

Zappa, a Compliant Quasi-Passive Biped Robot 

with a Tail and Elastic Knees 

Felix Monasterio-Huelin and Alvaro Gutierrez 

Universidad Politecnica de Madrid 

Spain 

Fernando J. Berenguer 

Fundacion Prodintec 
Spain 

1. Introduction 

Bipeds are complex hybrid dynamical systems mixing both continuous and discrete-event 
phenomena (Hurmuzlu et al., 2004). The main characteristic of biped walkers is the abrupt 
kinematic change between the swing phase and the stance phase together with dynamical im- 
pacts. The main problem is how to achieve a rhythmical or periodical walk. Another difficulty 
of these robots is their high power requirement and, consequently, high energy consumption, 
which limits their autonomy. It can be attributed to the high number of actuated joints, and 
because energetic studies are not typically considered during the movement's planning. 
Different studies focusing on the construction of locomotion controllers for completely actu- 
ated legged robots are found in the literature. These studies are mainly oriented to solve trajec- 
tory generation problems for the active control centered approach. In (Boeing & Braunl, 2004) 
the authors show there is an example of this methodology showing that an impedance control 
is better than the computed torque method. However, the conventional approach has been 
questioned by researchers inspired by biomechanical models (Kuo, 2007; McMahon, 1984). 
The discovery of McGeer about passive dynamic walking by building a biped without any 
motors or sensors (McGeer, 1990), opens the doors to a new design concept based on morpho- 
logical considerations. Moreover, the interaction between morphology and control is a topic of 
actual researches and debates in robotics (Pfeifer & Bongard, 2007). Therefore, exploiting the 
intrinsic passive dynamics has many advantages compared to the classical two-part method- 
ology (trajectory generation and active controller). Two of them are the energy consumption 
reduction (the energetic cost is produced in step-to-step transitions) and the simplicity of con- 
trol (low computational cost). Nevertheless, some theoretical and practical studies (Collins & 
Ruina, 2005) show that it is difficult to achieve the complex dynamics exhibited by humans 
and animals taking into account only the properties of simple passive-dynamic walking, but 
might help in the design of walking robots. In (Fumiya & Pfeifer, 2006) the authors show how 
to exploit the above mentioned passive properties of biped robots with the incorporation of 
sensors. 

254 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Typically, bipedal walking models assume rigid body structures. On the other hand, elastic 
materials seem to play an essential role in nature (Alexander, 2005). Therefore, spring-damper 
elements have been proposed as an initial solution for the compliant leg concept (Fumiya et al., 
2009; Geyer & Seyfarth, 2006). These solutions can be extended with adaptable compliance 
(inverse of stiffness) mechanisms (Ham et al., 2007). 

A mechanism for a real biped robot with a tail (i.e. Zappa) was proposed in (Berenguer & 
Monasterio-Huelin, 2006) and improved in (Berenguer & Monasterio-Huelin, 2008). Zappa is 
a robot able to walk in flat floors of different positive and negative slopes (Gutierrez et al., 
2008). The tail is the only actuated limb that imposes an oscillatory movement of variable 
frequency. By using this simple idea, it is possible to achieve an inverted pendulum trajectory 
for the legs. In this work, we propose a structural modification to Zappa, by adding elastic 
knees to the robot. This solution offers two main advantages: (i) a greater maneuverability 
and (ii) more compliant gaits. 

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 the robot kinematics are fully described. In 
section 3 we propose a new controller applied to the robot's tail. Moreover, we study the robot 
energy consumption, and focus on the robot initialization, as a restriction to the walking per- 
formance. Section 4 describes the robot parameters along with performance graphs. Finally, 
Section 5 summarizes the most relevant conclusions and suggests future research directions. 

2. The mechanism of the biped robot and the gait pattern 

2.1 Kinematic Description 

The previous implementation of Zappa (see Figure 1) had two legs, each composed of a four 
bars mechanism, four hip bars and a tail. The four bar mechanism includes a two bars femur, 
a one-bar foot and one hip's bar. The hip is composed of four bars, two of them joining the 
two bars femur of each leg, and the others two joining the legs. The tail is attached to one 
bar of the hip. The frontal plane is the ZY plane, the sagittal one is the XY plane and the 
transverse one is the ZX. To talk about the mechanism, we describe the following nomencla- 
ture as an example: A represents the line of the ankles, and AL and AR the left and right A 
lines respectively. When needed we will write AFL and ABL for the front and back of AL 
bars respectively. Figures 2a, 2b and 3a show the disposition of all bars and rotational joints. 
The foot has four possible contact points (C) with the floor (or ground, G) as depicted in Fig- 
ure 3b. To start walking, it is enough to move the tail around the Y axis and to fix a spring to 
the ABL and ABR ankles. In Zappa this movement is managed by a DC servomotor with a 
position sensor controlling the tail and an extensional spring holding the back femur and the 
foot. Nevertheless, in simulations we use a torsional spring for the ankles and a controller to 
generate torque for the tail joint, as explained in Section 2.2. 

The superior bar in the hip is added to avoid independent rotations of the legs around the 
X axis (see Figure 4). This bar is redundant in the stance phase. In general, this bar fixes a 
kinematic constraint to the hip angle: 

iir - q\L = 7T (i) 

This constraint could be relaxed adding a extensional spring (q$ = x$). The advantage of 
relaxing this constraint is to gain maneuverability to facilitate the rotation of the biped around 
the Y axis, and to avoid the sliding of the feet in the stance phase. In this work, we do not 
study the different configurations. On the other hand, the spring has been adjusted to generate 
enough force to avoid this balancing. 

Zappa, a Compliant Quasi-Passive Biped Robot with a Tail and Elastic Knees 

255 

Fig. 1. Zappa biped robot. Prototype without knees. 

1 v r\ 

Fig. 2. Sagittal plane of a leg (a) without and (c) with knee, (b) Frontal plane of the hip bars 
and the tail. 

For the stance phase there is a strong kinematic constraint that is avoided by producing a 
slight sliding of the feet in the Z direction, as depicted in Figure 5, 

l 2 sin(q 2 R) + hsin(qi) = hsin(q 1L ) (2) 

In the particular situation of q\ = 0, the sole solution is q 2 R + qih — n or qiR — qih- Therefore, 
the center of the hip bars will always lie in the midpoint between the feet. Furthermore, the 
distance between the feet depends on one ankle angle: L = 2lcos(q2)- 

To avoid the sliding, we propose to relax the latter kinematic constraint adding a knee. To do 
this, we have divided the femur in two parts, from now on femur and tibia, as depicted in 
Figure 2c (^)- If the knee bar is rigid, each leg femur bars are parallel, and so are the tibia 
bars. The second kinematic constraint has been broken, but the pentagonal kinematic closed 
chain imposes a new constraint: 

256 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

41 

■ V 

C4L |C2L 

-CM) A 

C13 C24 

ALF 
ALB 

i 

Z C3L 'ciL 

+ A 

C34 C12 

A 

(a) 

(b) 

Fig. 3. (a) Transverse plane of the Central Hip and the Tail, (b) Three planes of a foot: joints 
with the leg and contact points with the floor. 

(a) (b) 

Fig. 4. Hip superior bar added to avoid oscillations around the X axis. 

Fig. 5. (a) A possible configuration during the stance phase, (b) A possible time sequence t\-t 3 
to show the needed feet sliding in Z direction for the robot without knees. 

hsin(q 3R ) + hsin(q 2 R) = hsin(q 3L ) + hsin(q 1L ) (3) 

As shown in Figure 6, a robot with knees is able to move from posture I to posture II without 
modifying the distance L and without sliding. Moreover, we observe point O changes its 
relative position and the height of the hip to the ground also varies. Therefore, this way of 
moving is more compliant. 

Zappa, a Compliant Quasi-Passive Biped Robot with a Tail and Elastic Knees 

257 

41 

KR 
KL 

(I) (II) 

Fig. 6. A possible movement of the robot with knees which avoids the sliding in the Z axis. 

Both in the swing and the stance phase the feet are parallel to each other, both in the biped 
with and without knees. However, if we add elastic knees to the robot, we are able to avoid 
this third kinematic constraint, obtaining interesting properties. For example, with the feet 
completely aligned the sole solution is the one shown in Figure 7a. With only one foot on the 
floor it is possible that the other leg is in the posture of Figure 7b. This mechanism adds two 
new degrees of freedom (dof) to the robot (q^) (one translational dof for each leg). 

Fig. 7. Two possible postures for the robot with elastic knees. 

2.2 Gait Description 

As shown in Figure 2c, the springs are rotational in the ankles (ABL, ABR, q$) and in the 
knee /femur (joining the femur and the knee bar; KBL, KBR, q^). In the knee bar (line K, 
^4 = X4) and in the superior hip bar (line Q', q$ = X5) the springs are extensional. They are 
modelled as linear torque or force generators according to the equations: 

?i = -k{(qi - q Q i) - btfi, f = 2,3 
Fi = -ki(xi - x z °) - biXi, f = 4,5 

(4) 

(5) 

258 Climbing and Walking Robots 

where q® and x® are the i-spring equilibrium position, k{ the i-spring constant and bj the i- 

viscous damping coefficient. 

Selecting the springs is far from a trivial task as shown in (Gutierrez et al., 2008). In that 

work, the authors studied a variable tuning for the ankle spring in the biped without knees 

using evolutionary optimization techniques. The fitness function was the travelled distance 

in a specified time and at different slopes of the floor. A mechanism that is able to change 

the spring parameters in real time was proposed in (Ham et al., 2007) using two servomotors 

(in general it is possible to generate the spring torque or force with only one DC motor and 

an electrical current controller). In the present work we have empirically obtained constant 

parameters by means of computer simulations. 

One important question, not mentioned before, is related to the reaction forces between the 

feet and the ground. This question is extremely important in walking robots because of the 

strokes that occur when changing from the swing phase to the stance phase, and because they 

are variables that show the biped stability. 

The total reaction force (F#) of the robot satisfies the following vectorial equation, 

F K = M(cin - g) (6) 

where cm is the acceleration of its center of mass referred to some inertial coordinates system, 
g the gravitational acceleration and M the mass of the robot. The Newton equation of a foot is 

*R + f AB + *AF + ^Fg = M F a F (7) 

where f # is the reaction force of one leg, m F the mass of the foot, f ^g and f^p the forces exerted 
by the back femur (or tibias, for the robot with knees) and frontal femur respectively on the 
foot (ankles AB and AF). 

Hence, F# = f^ + f##. When the foot is on the floor ap = 0. In the other case f# = 0. 
Therefore, measuring ap is enough to know if one leg is on the floor except in the case of 
elastic knees, because the foot may oscillate around the Z axis. Simulations made in this work 
consider that the foot is in the air if all the reaction forces at each contact point in the three 
directions of space (x,y,z) are zero. Figure 8 shows the timing of the moments of contact of feet 
with the ground (represented as zero) overlapped with the reaction forces of each foot. 
For the computer simulations, we have modelled the contact point between the feet and the 
floor as attractive forces that depend on the velocity of each foot contact point for the X and 
Z direction. For the Y direction, a stiffness factor has been added. This factor depends on 
the position only when position and velocity are negative (Berenguer & Monasterio-Huelin, 
2007a). 

Most figures that follow have been overlapped with this timing to properly interpret them. 
The functioning of the biped robot is as follows: when q$ = the robot remains standing. 
For ]i{t) around zr/2 the robot rises a leg while the other remains in the floor. In other words, 
the tail works as a dynamic counterweight varying q\. Because of the torque applied to the 
tail joint, the moment produced in the legs creates a pendular oscillation in both legs. This 
oscillation is produced around the ankle (A) for the foot on the floor and around the hip (H) 
for the foot in the air. This oscillation depends on all the springs of the robot. The potential 
energy stored in the springs acts as an energy generator allowing a compliant walking. 
To be more concise, we can distinguish a clear sequence of movements of point P (tail joint) 
during the turn of the tail. The swing phase begin lifting one leg when q§ = zr/2 — \i until 
7i/2, and provokes that P x > 0. From zr/2 until qo = zr/2 — // the swing phase continues 
until the foot makes contact with the ground; hence P x > 0. In the stance phase P x changes 

Zappa, a Compliant Quasi-Passive Biped Robot with a Tail and Elastic Knees 

259 

1Z0 1^5 1^0 1^5 1^0 1^5 1^0 1Z0 1^5 1^0 1^5 1^0 1^5 liTO 

Time(s) Time(s) 

(a) (b) 

Fig. 8. Left (solid) and Right (dashed) feet reaction forces for a robot (a) without knees and (b) 
with elastic knees. 

its sign until qo = — tt/2 + ]i, repeating the cycle. Figure 9 shows this sequence. In Figure 10 
the limit cycle (42 versus q^ f° r the robot without knees, 43 versus q^ and 42 versus q^ f° r the 
robot with elastic knees) of the biped gait pattern is shown. We define the limit cycle as a 
sequence of steps used as an index of whole stability (Hobbelen & Wisse, 2007) in contrast to 
the ZMP (Vukobratovic et al., 1990) that imposes local stability at every instant in time. 
In Figure 9 we show the Py kinematic equation when all the four contact points of the foot are 
in the floor. However, this is not the general case when the robot has elastic knees because Py 
depends on the angle between the foot and the floor in the stance phase. Therefore, the biped 
robot with elastic knees walks raising the heel (line C13 in Figure 3b) of the swinging leg and 
falls on it at the end of a step (in a similar way to human walking). 

1ZCT 

^0 1^5 TXcT 
Time(s) 

(a) 

T^b 

1Z0~ 

^0 1^5 TXcT 
Time(s) 

(b) 

T^b 

Fig. 9. qn (solid) and P y (dotdashed) of the biped (a) without knees (in the stance phase P y i = 
l\ \sin(qn) I + hsin(q2L)) and (b) with elastic knees (in the stance phase Pyi = l\ \sin(qn) | + 
hsin(q2L) + hsin(q^i) with no elastic knees, as explained in the text). 

The angular position and torque of the Knee /Femur spring and the linear position and force 
of the Knee spring are shown in Figure 11. 

260 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

^10 ' 0.00 0.05 0.10 

q 2 (rad) 

(a) 

Fig. 10. Limit cycle of the biped (a) without knees, (b) % versus q$ and (c) 42 versus c\^ with 
elastic knees. 

~\5s T3x> 1^5 1X0 1X5 TjTo 
Time(s) 

Wo 1^5 1^0 1X5 1^0 
Time(s) 

(a) (b) 

Fig. 11. (a) Left (dotdashed) and Right (solid) femurs torques of a robot with elastic knees, (b) 
Left (dotdashed) and Right (solid) knees forces of a robot with elastic knees. 

3. Tail control, power consumption and stability of the biped 

To achieve a regular walking gait the tail has to be controlled adequately. This can be done 
imposing a sinusoidal movement to the tail (qo r )- However, because all initial conditions are 
zero (the robot is with both feet together) and because an abrupt change could make the biped 
to fall, a special starting procedure is needed. The idea is to begin the walk with short strides 
before imposing a sinusoidal oscillation of constant frequency /. In (Berenguer & Monasterio- 
Huelin, 2007b) chirp functions were used to study the dependency of this starting procedure 
as a function of frequency variation. In this work, we use a chirp function to switch to the 
sinusoidal by imposing continuity conditions in position, velocity and acceleration. For these 
reasons, there is only one solution depending on two parameters: (i) the time at which the 
switch occurs (tf) and (ii) the number of periods the chirp must perform (N). 

%r 

n/2sin(at 2 ), 
n/2sin(2nf(t- 

(8) 

t < t f 
■t f ) + (2N-l)n/2), t>t f 

where a = (2N — l)n/ (2t ?). Figure 12 shows the reference signal for the tail. 

To control the tail, we set up this chirp function as the reference signal. The tail satisfies the 

following two vectorial Newton-Euler equations: 

f j + m^g = mjdLj 

(9) 

Zappa, a Compliant Quasi-Passive Biped Robot with a Tail and Elastic Knees 

261 

a ^-f 

c Z? 

1 2 5 3 § g 
Time(s) 

(a) 
Fig. 12. Reference signal (solid) (qo r ) with fy 
error integral (dotdashed) for a PD with kp - 
with elastic knees. 

1 2 5 4 § g 
Time(s) 

(b) 
3s, N = 2, error signal (dashed) and squared 
300 and fc D = 20. (a) Without knees and (b) 

Tj + fjxlo = la + o; x(Ia;) 

(10) 

where aj is the linear acceleration of the tail center of mass, mp the mass of the tail, g the 
gravitational acceleration, 1q the radial vector from the tail joint to the tail center of mass, I the 
tail inertia matrix, oc the tail angular acceleration, and to the tail angular velocity. 
Solving these equations in the Y direction (tail's rotation axis) and assuming a punctual mass, 
we obtain the mechanical torque that must be applied to the tail: 

t t = m T l a Tz , (11) 

where z f is the Z component in the frame attached to the tail. 

The linear acceleration of the tail center of mass (when no sliding) in the stance phase is 

*Tz> = k% + Pz> (12) 

where P z > is the linear acceleration of point P in the frame attached to the tail joint with respect 
to the inertial coordinate system projected in the z' axis. 

In the stance phase and assuming there is not sliding, the tail joint has no Z component, and 
the X and Y components are because of the pendular movement of the legs around the ankles. 
As aforementioned, the biped without knees cannot avoid this sliding (see Figure 5) but it is 
kinematically possible for a biped with knees to do it. 

The controller we propose applies a torque to the tail joint following Equation 13 (a feedfor- 
ward term and a PD feedback controller): 

t t = mjl^ajr + kpe + k^e (13) 

where e = qo r — q$, aj r = loqo r , and kp and kp constants that must be tuned. 

Taking into account the mechanical torque and ordering the terms we obtain the Laplace error 

equation, 

{m T lls 2 + k D s + kp)E(s) = m T l C(P) (14) 

If we select stable poles and lim sC(P) = 0, the steady-state error will be zero. The transient 

response will be very short when choosing the poles with high values. Figure 12 shows the 
error signal and the squared error integral. 

262 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

1Z0 1^5 13.0 13.5 14.0 14.5 15.0 
Time(s) 

(a) 

izo vn> T^o f3T5 t4To t4T5 T5T6 
Time(s) 

(b) 

Fig. 13. Energy (dotdashed) and Power consumption (solid) for a robot (a) without knees and 
(b) with elastic knees in the time interval from 12 to 15 seconds. 

Another important problem for biped robots is the mechanical power (P(t)) and energy (E(t)) 
consumption. Because the tail is the only actuated joint, we can define them using the follow- 
ing relations: 

P(t) = T Tz % 

[\P(t)\ 

Jo 

dt 

(15) 
(16) 

Figure 13 shows the power and energy consumption. 

As mentioned in Section 2.2 the limit cycle shown in Figure 10 could be used to analyze the 
cyclic stability of the biped. This study would proceed gait by gait searching a stable periodic 
motion, although it might not be a stable motion in every instant of time. In this work we do 
not analyze this important question, and we do not know if the system is stable in either one 
sense (cyclically) or the other (locally). Actually, we know that the robot with elastic knees 
does not fall and we consider it as a proof of its stability. This analysis remains to be done in 
a near future. 

4. Simulation Studies 

The robot has been simulated thanks to the SimMechanics toolbox included in the Matlab soft- 
ware. Robots with and without knees maintain the same weight. The femur and the tibia have 
been blocked in the robot with knees to simulate the robot without knees. The task performs a 
straight line walking for 15 simulated seconds where the tail's frequency oscillation is 0.7 Hz 
for both simulated robots. 

The main parameters of the robot used in simulations are presented in Table 1 where the "K" 
corresponds to the robot with knees. (Note that l^ = hK + hx)- The constant "d" represents 
the distance between frontal and back bars of a leg. 
Finally, the different values of the springs parameters are presented in Table 2. 

5. Conclusions and future work 

Comparing a biped with and without knees is a hard problem because of their structural dif- 
ferences. Nevertheless, in this work we have stated there are at least two measurements that 

Zappa, a Compliant Quasi-Passive Biped Robot with a Tail and Elastic Knees 

263 

Name 

Value 

Name 

Value 

Name 

Value 

"hail 

760 gr. 

h 

150 mm. 

d 

40 mm. 

m hip 

210gr. 

h 

100 mm. 

Ifootcn 

320 mm. 

m legs 

920 gr. 

h 

400 mm. 

lf00t C 13 

80 mm. 

m feet 

280 gr. 

hK 

200 mm. 

lf00t C2 4-AF 

120 mm. 

M T 

2170 gr. 

hK 

200 mm. 

Table 1. Simulation parameters: dimensions and masses 

Spring 

k 

b 

qVorx" 

Ankle 

10 

0.4 

Femur /Knee 

8 

0.1 

Knee 

750 

100 

-0.007 

Superior Hip 

200000 

5000 

Table 2. Simulation parameters: springs 

may serve as performance indexes: (i) the distance travelled considering the same experimen- 
tal conditions and (ii) the capacity of the robot to walk with a higher tail frequency Simulation 
results indicate that the robot with elastic knees is superior to the robot without knees because 
the former travels larger distances with the same oscillatory frequency (f=0.7Hz). Moreover, 
the robot with elastic knees can walk with a higher frequency (f=0.8 Hz), at which the robot 
without knees falls down. The reason why the robot with knees travels a larger distance is not 
only because of this higher frequency capacity, but because the robot raises the feet higher in 
each stride. This is the result of leg spring combination. 

As observed in the figures presented in this work, the performance of the two types of robots 
are very similar, in consumption (Figure 13), in the response of the tail controller (q$) (Fig- 
ure 12), in the reaction forces (Figure 8) and in the way the hip angle {q\) oscillates to pass 
from the stance phase to the swing phase (Figure 9). Nevertheless, because of the kinematic 
differences between Py,s it is difficult to draw definitive conclusions. We conjecture that it is 
possible for the robot with elastic knees to avoid the lateral sliding mentioned in this paper. 
This suggests a design of the robot in which the angle q\ remains constant during the stance 
phase. Other possibility is a design in which the hip spring of the superior bar allows lateral 
balancing without sliding, but we have not yet addressed this question. 

The way the robot with elastic knees walks is very different from the way the robot without 
knees walks, in a more compliant way. The limit cycles depicted in Figure 10 show clearly a big 
difference, but the problem remains in how to compare the two types of robots. One possibility 
is taking into account their skills. The foot raising height might be an useful criterion if the 
robot with knees could finally climb stairs. In Gutierrez et al. (2008) the authors demonstrated 
that the robot without knees could go up and down different inclination slopes. This was 
achieved by tuning, in real time, the ankle spring parameter values. Therefore, it produced a 
modification on the robot equilibrium position, translated in different legs' inclinations. We 
have proved the same for the robot with knees, but it remains an open question if the robot 
can climb stairs or turn around. The relaxation of kinematic constraints, we have proposed in 
this work, points towards this line of research seeking the increase of its manoeuvrability. 

264 Climbing and Walking Robots 

6. References 

Alexander, R. M. (2005). Walking made simple, Science Magazine 308(5718): 58-59. 

Berenguer, F. J. & Monasterio-Huelin, F. (2006). Easy design and construction of a biped walk- 
ing mechanism with low power consumption, Proc. of the 9th Int. Conf. Climbing and 
Walking Robots CLAWAR'06, Springer- Verlag, Berlin, Germany, pp. 96-103. 

Berenguer, F. J. & Monasterio-Huelin, F (2007a). Stability and smoothness improvements for 
an underactuated biped with a tail, Proc. of the 2007 IEEE Symp. on Industrial Electron- 
ics, IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, pp. 2083-2088. 

Berenguer, F. J. & Monasterio-Huelin, F (2007b). Trajectory planning using oscillatory chirp 
functions applied to bipedal locomotion, Proc. of the 4th Int. Conf. on Informatics in 
Control, Automation and Robotics, IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, pp. 70-75. 

Berenguer, F. J. & Monasterio-Huelin, F. (2008). Zappa, a quasi-passive biped walking robot 
with a tail, modeling, behavior and kinematic estimation using accelerometers, IEEE 
Transactions on Industrial Electronics 55(9): 3281-3289. 

Boeing, A. & Braunl, T. (2004). Evolution of locomotion controllers for legged robot, in T. et al. 
(ed.), Robotic Welding, Intelligence and Automation, Vol. 299 of Eecture Notes in Control 
and Information Sciences (ENCIS), Springer- Verlag, Berlin, Germany, pp. 228-240. 

Collins, S. H. & Ruina, A. (2005). A bipedal walking robot with efficient and human-like gait, 
Proc. of the 2005 IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, IEEE Press, Piscataway, 
NJ, pp. 1983-1988. 

Fumiya, I., Minekawa, Y, Rummel, J. & Seyfarth, A. (2009). Toward a humanlike biped robot 
with compliant legs, Robotics and Automation Systems 57(2): 139-144. 

Fumiya, I. & Pfeifer, R. (2006). Sensing through body dynamics, Robotics and Autonomous 
Systems 54(8): 631-640. 

Geyer, H. & Seyfarth, A. (2006). Walking and running dynamics explained by compliant 
legs: Consequences, general insights, and future directions, Journal of Biomechanics 
39(1): 361. 

Gutierrez, A., Berenguer, F J. & Monasterio-Huelin, F. (2008). Evolution of neuro-controllers 
for trajectory planning applied to a bipedal walking robot with a tail, in A. Lazinika 
(ed.), New Developments in Robotics, Automation and Control, I-Tech Education and 
Publishing, Vienna, Austria. 

Ham, R. V, Vanderborght, B., Damme, M. V, Verrelst, B. & D.Lefeber (2007). Maccepa, 
the mechanically adjustable compliance and controllable equilibrium position actu- 
ator: Design and implementation in a biped robot, Robotics and Autonomous Systems 
55(10): 761-768. 

Hobbelen, D. G. E. & Wisse, M. (2007). Limit cycle walking, in M. Hackel (ed.), Humanoid 
Robots, Human-like Machines, I-Tech Education and Publishing, Vienna, Austria. 

Hurmuzlu, Y, Genot, F. & Brogliato, B. (2004). Modeling, stability and control of biped robots 
A general framework, Automatica 40(10): 1647-1664. 

Kuo, A. (2007). The six determinants of gait and the inverted pendulum analogy: A dynamic 
walking perspective, Human Movement Science 26(4): 617-656. 

McGeer, T. (1990). Passive dynamic walking, Int. Journal of Robotics Research 9(2): 62-82. 

McMahon, T. (1984). Muscles, Reflexes, and Locomotion, Princeton Press, Princeton, NJ. 

Pfeifer, R. & Bongard, J. C. (2007). How the Body Shapes the Way We Think: A New View of 
Intelligence (Bradford Books), The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 

Vukobratovic, M., Borovac, B., Surla, D. & Stokic, D. (1990). Biped Locomotion: Dynamics, 
Stability, Control and Application, Springer- Verlag, Berlin, Germany. 

16 

Quadrupedal Gait Generation Based on 
Human Feeling for Animal Type Robot 

Hidekazu Suzuki and Hitoshi Nishi 
Tokyo Polytechnic University & Fukui National College of Technology 

Japan 

1. Introduction 

Animals have for long been recognized as being a positive force in healing processes (Baun 
et al., 1984). In recent years, animal-assisted therapy (A AT), which makes use of the healing 
effects of animals has attracted attention (Fine, 2006). Examples of the expected results of 
this type of therapy are buffering actions for stress, improvement of sociability and 
shortening of the medical treatment period through mental healing. Thus, the introduction 
of AAT is being considered in hospitals and health facilities. However, it is difficult to 
employ AAT in such facilities because of the risks of the spread of infection from animals to 
patients and the necessity of proper animal training. 

Robot-assisted therapy (RAT), in which robots resembling animals are used instead of real 
animals, is important for patient safety (Shibata et al., 2005). Pet robots resembling various 
animals, such as the dog robot "AIBO", seal robot "Paro", etc., are used in this type of 
therapy. Banks et al. reported no difference between the effectiveness of a living dog and an 
AIBO robotic dog in reducing loneliness (Banks et al., 2008). Shibata et al. applied a mental 
commit robot, Paro, to RAT, and they verified that the interaction with Paro has 
psychological, physiological and social effects on people (Shibata et al., 2004; Wada et al., 
2005). In these applications, it is important that the robot imitates the motions of living 
animal, especially essential motions, such as walking, running, etc. 

However, it is difficult for the robot to walk and run like an animal because it is affected by 
various types of dynamic noise in the real world, in contrast to the ideal world. In recent 
years, many researchers have studied gait generation methods for various types of robots 
(Estremera & Santos, 2005; Kimura et al., 2005). A legged robot in the real world will have n- 
DOF (degrees of freedom) for movement, and it is difficult to solve the optimization 
problem in n-dimensional continuous state/ action space to generate an adequate gait 
(Kimura et al., 2001). Therefore, evolutionary approaches, such as use of fuzzy logic, genetic 
algorithms, neural networks, or various hybrid systems, are employed for gait learning and 
parameter optimization (Inada & Ishii, 2003; Son et al., 2002). For example, Chernova et al. 
generated fast forward gaits using an evolutionary approach for quadruped robots 
(Chernova & Velosa, 2004). However, these gait generation methods for legged robots did 
not evaluate the degree to which the robot's movement approximated that of a living 
animal, because they were not designed for enhancement of the effects of RAT. 

266 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

In the present study, therefore, we attempted to generate an animal gait for a quadrupedal 
robot using a genetic algorithm and gait patterns based on zoological characteristics (Suzuki 
et al., 2007). Moreover, a questionnaire study was performed to determine an adequate mix 
of several combinations of gait velocity and duty ratio for generated gait, and thus a more 
natural animal-like gait for the AIBO was chosen based on subjective human feelings from 
among the various gaits. Furthermore, parameters of each leg were adjusted again through 
an additional optimization on the ground. 

2. Concept of Gait Generation 

In this research, we used AIBO (ERS-7 M2, Sony), which is a well-known quadrupedal pet 
robot, as shown in Fig. 1. AIBO has 15 joints (head and legs), 3 DOF (degrees of freedom) at 
each leg, and 31 sensors. We can construct an application to control AIBO using OPEN-R 
SDK, a cross-development environment based on the C++ language provided by Sony. 
Usually, when generating a gait for a robot, we often construct a robot model on the basis of 
dynamics. However, the dynamics of AIBO change in a complex manner depending on the 
situation in a real environment, and therefore strict modeling is difficult. Moreover, it may 
be even more difficult to define subjective human feelings for animals based on a model. 
Therefore, we generated a gait for AIBO on the basis of that of living animal and subjective 
human feelings. 

Fig. 1. AIBO (ERS-7 M2 : Sony) 

We attribute animal gait to that which achieves efficient propulsion. Moreover, both mono- 
leg propulsion and coordinated movement of each leg realize an efficient gait. Hence, we 
attempted to generate the orbit of a mono-leg, based on an animal's orbit, which can achieve 
efficient propulsion in the real world. 

Figure 2 shows the normal gait of a walking dog. In this figure, (a) represents the dog's leg 
that is in contact with the ground and (d) represents the leg shape, which kicks out. Further, 
the start and end shapes of the leg are decided as shown in Fig. 3. However, the 
intermediary orbit in the real world is unknown. Therefore, we utilized a genetic algorithm 
(GA) (Michalewicz, 1994; Goldberg, 1989; Goldberg, 2002) to optimize the intermediary orbit 
ofAIBO'sleg. 

Quadrupedal Gait Generation Based on Human Feeling for Animal Type Robot 

267 

Fig. 2. Normal gait of a dog 

Fig. 3. Start and end shapes of the leg 

3. Orbit Generation for AlBO's Leg 

A genetic algorithm is an example of an AI program (Back, 1996) and is well known as a 
parallel search and optimization process that mimics natural selection and evolution. In the 
GA process, the search for a solution to a given problem is performed using a population of 
individuals as binary strings, which represent the potential solutions to that problem. The 

268 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

GA is viewed as an optimization method as the iterative process of evolution toward better 
search solutions is equivalent to the process of optimizing the fitness function. The term 
"parallel," which is used in "parallel search" above, is related to the implicit parallelism of 
GA and has been explained previously by Goldberg (Goldberg, 1989; Goldberg, 2002). This 
concept means that even though the GA processes only s individuals in the population in 
each generation, we can obtain useful processing of around s 3 schemata in parallel without 
any special bookkeeping or memory requirements. 

Figure 4 shows the genes of the GA employed in the present search, which has three 
parameters (61, 61, r). Here, by studying the moving image of a dog's gait, we noted that 
there is a turning point that changes the velocity of the leg in front and behind. It appears 
that the function of the leg changes from providing support to driving. The three parameters 
(61, 61, r) represent the leg shape at this turning point, as shown in Fig. 5, and T g is the 
grounding time [ms]. Hence, the intermediary orbit is uniquely decided by the parameters 
(61, 61, r). Briefly, the problem of generating a high propulsive orbit for AIBO's leg is 
changed to the problem of optimizing the parameters (61, 61, r). 

10011.01100.10111 

6\ 61 r 

0-45° 0-40° 0.0-1.0 

Fig. 4. Genes of GA 

Fig. 5. 61, 61, r and T g 

The GA process is shown in Fig. 6. A population comprising a set of s individuals is used by 
the GA process to search for the target orbit in the real world. As the elitist model of the GA 
is adopted, the best sorted individual in the N-th population, designated as a vector (/> f and 
possibly representing the leg's orbit, which can realize efficient propulsion in the real world 
is selected to survive. Let us denote the components of ^ f expressing the orbit of the Z-th 
individual in the N-th generation by 61 f , 61 f , and r f . 

In this study, we prepared a board attached with a free wheel, as shown in Fig. 7, to 
evaluate the propulsion caused by mono-leg motion in the real environment. Moreover, we 
adopted the measured advance distance of the evaluation board as the fitness value of the 

Quadrupedal Gait Generation Based on Human Feeling for Animal Type Robot 

269 

GA search. In this evaluation system, AIBO moves the mono-leg only for one cycle based on 
the orbit represented by each individual of the population. 

The obtained fitness values E f 

»),2?», 

., E 

) are sorted. Based on the 

ranking and a selection rate to die, the weakest individuals in terms of poor fitness values 
are replaced by newly created individuals. In creating the new individuals, random 
selection and random crossover are first performed. In this process, paired mates and two- 
point crossover are used. Next, a random bit-by-bit mutation (exchange of 1 by or vice 
versa) is performed on the individuals obtained after the crossover. This ends the N-th 
generation and the population obtained after these operations constitute the population at 
the starting point of the (N+l)-th generation. The preceding steps are then repeated with the 
individuals in population N+l to evolve the population toward the solution. 

N-th generation 

Evaluation 

Population ofp 
individual vectors 

^-[eiiV^rN] Ei N = E(<A N ) 

2 N = [ei 2 N ,e2 2 N ,r 2 N ] E 2 N ^E(^ N ) 

**-[<, 82*1*1 E/ N =E(0; N ) 

i N = [ei. N ,e2. N ,r i N ] E, N = E(<fc N ) 

Fig. 6. Elitist model searching of a GA 

(N+l)-th generation 

selection mutation 

sorting 

( side view ) 

( top view ) 

Free wheel | Measurement | Measurement 

Fig. 7. Measurement method 

In this experiment, we prepared three normal orbits, as shown in Fig. 8, using two-link 
inverse kinematics to compare the fitness value of the orbit optimized by the above GA 
process. Figure 9 shows the result of this experiment. Further, the orbit approximating an 
animal's gait and optimized by the GA shows a high evaluation value, i.e., a high propulsive 

270 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

force. In this GA process, the population size, selection rate, and mutation rate are 10 
individuals, 0.5, and 0.3, resr>ectivelv. 

Fig. 8. Comparison orbits 

0.60 

0.50 

J 0.40 

CO 

> 

.2 0.30 

+-> 

CO 

5 0.20 

LU 

0.10 
0.00 

♦ z=120mm 
■ z=125mm 

z=130mm 

• GA 

115 

♦ 
120 

125 130 

z [mm] 

Imitating animal 
and GA searching 

Fig. 9. Experimental result of GA 

4. Quadrupedal Gait Based on Human Feeling 

As described in the previous section, we constructed the orbit of the mono-leg that can 
provide efficient propulsive force by approximating an animal's gait and optimizing GA. 
Next, we addressed the coordination between each leg, which can realize an efficient gait. 
The gaits of various animals have already been studied and analyzed in the field of zoology. 
Moreover, Alexander et al. classified quadrupedal gait on the basis of energy cost, as shown 
in Fig. 10 (Alexander et al., 1980). In this figure, the numbers near each leg represent the 
phase difference based on the left forefoot; d is the duty ratio and it refers to the grounding 
ratio. In this classification, the phase difference between a dog's walking gait and running 
gait correspond to that between the "Walk" and "Trot" gaits shown in Figs. 10(a) and (b), 
respectively. We generated the quadrupedal gait of AIBO using both the above-mentioned 
optimum orbit of mono-leg and "Walk" gait to generate an animal-like walking gait. 

Quadrupedal Gait Generation Based on Human Feeling for Animal Type Robot 

271 

lQ 

0.5 ( a > 

/ Walk 

( d > 0.5 ) 
Amble 
\ (d<0.5) 

0.75 0.25 

Q 

0.5 (b) 

/ 
Trot 
( d = 0.3 - 0.5 ) 

0.5 

iQ 

0.3 

(d) 

Canter 

( d = 0.3 - 0.5 ) 

Q 

0.7 

0.5 

0.2 

Transverse 

gallop 
(d<0.4) 

0.8 

Fig. 10. Classification of quadrupedal gaits 

Duty ratio ( grounding ratio) 

0.51 

0.56 

0.63 

0.69 

0.75 

Tall 

[ms] 

200 

58 

54 

38 

67 

36 

600 

78 

78 

72 

57 

57 

1000 

79 

78 

80 

59 

69 

1400 

74 

62 

69 

65 

58 

1800 

62 

67 

49 

51 

49 

Table 1. Questionnaire related to subjective human feeling 

In the "Walk" gait, the duty ratio generally decreases from 0.75 to 0.50 depending on the 
increment in the gait velocity. However, it is difficult to select an adequate mix of gait 
velocity and its duty ratio to cause a human observer to perceive an animal-like gait, 
because of the variable sensitivity of humans. Hence, we prepared a questionnaire study 
regarding several combinations of the gait velocity and duty ratio to determine an adequate 
mix. The results of the questionnaire study for 30 participants are shown in Table 1. In this 
table, Tail indicates the time period at motion cycle of mono-leg and includes the grounding 
time, which corresponds to T g in Fig. 5 and is calculated as T a ii x (duty ratio), and idling 
motion. This questionnaire study presented the participants with the moving image, the 
combined duty ratio of the 25 patterns, and T a ii. Further, the participants assigned points 
from 1 (poor) to 5 (good, meaning the gait resembled that of a living animal) according to 
their subjective feelings regarding each moving image. Figures 11-13 show the results for 
duty ratios of 0.51, 0.63, and 0.75, respectively, for each value of T a ii. Table 2 and Fig. 14 
show the median of the polling number that seems to be the average subjective human 
feelings regarding the animal gaits. 

272 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

% 70 

E 60 

3 40 

o 

PM 30 

200 600 1000 1400 

Tan ( Time to 1 cycle of leg's orbit ) 

Fig. 11. Questionnaire data of duty ratio 0.51 

200 600 1000 1400 

Tan ( Time to 1 cycle of leg's orbit ) 

Fig. 12. Questionnaire data of duty ratio 0.63 

20 
10 - 

200 600 1000 1400 

Tail ( Time to 1 cycle of leg's orbit ) 

Fig. 13. Questionnaire data of duty ratio 0.75 

""-\ 

Duty ratio ( grounding ratio) 

0.51 

0.56 

0.63 

0.69 

0.75 

Median of 
gait cycle [ms] 

996 

995 

1020 

1031 

1038 

Table 2. Median data of polling number 

Quadrupedal Gait Generation Based on Human Feeling for Animal Type Robot 

273 

980 — - 
960 
940 
920 
900 1— 

0.51 0.56 0.63 0.69 0.75 

Duty ratio 

Fig. 14. Median of each duty ratio 
I 

Fig. 15. Quadrupedal gait of AIBO based on animal gait 

Fig. 16. Motion verification at conference 

Figure 15 shows one of the animal gaits generated by the orbit of the mono-leg optimized by 
the GA, and an adequate mix of gait velocity and duty ratio based on subjective human 
feelings. In this gait, T a \\ is 1020 [ms] and the duty ratio is 0.63. Further, we have presented 
AIBO's gait generated by the above method at an international conference to verify the 
degree to which it approximates the natural gait of a living animal based on subjective 
human feelings (Fig. 16); we have confirmed that many viewers feel that this AIBO gait is 
fairly similar to that of a living animal. 

274 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 17. Walking on ground 

5. Modification for Dynamical Interference 

We performed further experiment using the generated gait (Fig. 15) to check the adaptability 
to interaction with ground like that shown in Fig. 17. AIBO walked forward unsteadily, and 
the motion did not resemble the gait of a living animal. It seems that the generated gait 
cannot adapt to the dynamical interference by ground reaction. 

So, we tried the additional optimization for generated gait to correct minor deviation of 
angle and timing for each joint. In this optimization experiment, the parameters {01, 01) of 
each joint generated by above-mentioned process are modified slightly in the range of ±8[°] 
by GA. In the optimizing process, the walking distance at 5 cycles of gait is adopted as the 
evaluation value of the GA. Figure 18 shows the gaits of each generation in this experiment. 
In the first half of the optimization, AIBO walked unsteadily and diagonally. However, at 
the 10-th generation, AIBO walked straight ahead stably and its gait resembled that of a 
living dog as well as the result of previous experiment (Fig. 15). 

6. Conclusion 

We proposed a method for generation of an animal gait for a quadrupedal robot. This 
method optimizes the orbit of the mono-leg using a GA based on the propulsive force and 
realizes the coordination of each leg on the basis of subjective human feelings. Moreover, we 
modified the generated gait by additional GA optimization to adapt to the dynamical 
interference by ground reaction. 

We checked that AIBO walks straight ahead by proposed method, however, we also 
checked the centroid fluctuation at leg switching. It seems that the gait evaluation used for 
GA reproduction should include stability performance. In a future study, we intend to 
improve the evaluation method of optimization by including a body balance parameter. 

Quadrupedal Gait Generation Based on Human Feeling for Animal Type Robot 

275 

1 st Generation 3 rd Generation 6 th Generation 10 th Generation 

Fig. 18. Gait at each generations 

7. References 

Alexander, R. McN.; Jayes, A. S. & Ker, R. F. (1980). Estimation of energy cost for 
quadrupedal running gaits, Journal of Zoology, vol. 190, pp. 155-192. 

Back, T. (1996). Evolutionary Algorithms in Theory and Practice, Oxford University Press, ISBN- 
9780195099713, Oxford. 

Banks, M. R.; Willoughby, L. M & Banks, W. A. (2008). Animal- Assisted Therapy and 
Loneliness in Nursing Homes: Use of Robotic versus Living Dogs, Journal of the 
American Medical Directors Association, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 173-177. 

Baun, M. M.; Bergstrom, N.; Langston, N. & Thoma, L. (1984). Physiological Effects of 
Human/ Companion Animal Bonding, Nursing Research, Vol. 33, No. 3, pp. 126-129. 

Chernova, S. & Velosa, M. (2004). An Evolutionary Approach to Gait Learning for Four- 
Legged Robots, Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent 
Robots and Systems, pp. 2562-2567. 

Estremera, J. & Santos, P. G. (2005). Generating Continuous Free Crab Gaits for Quadruped 
Robots on Irregular Terrain, IEEE Transactions on Robotics, Vol. 21, No. 6, pp. 1067- 
1076. 

Fine, A. H. (2006). Handbook on Animal-assisted Therapy: Theoretical Foundations and Guidelines 
for Practice, Academic Press, ISBN-9780123694843, California. 

276 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Goldberg, D. E. (1989). Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning, 

Addison-Wesley, ISBN-9780201157673, Boston. 
Goldberg, D. E. (2002). The Design of Innovation: Lessons from and for Competent Genetic 

Algorithms, Springer, ISBN-9781402070983, New York. 
Inada, H. & Ishii, K. (2003). Behavior Generation of Bipedal Robot Using Central Pattern 

Generator (CPG) -1st Report: CPG Parameters Searching Method by Genetic 

Algorithm, Proceedings of the 2003 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent 

Robots and Systems, pp. 2179-2184. 
Kimura, H.; Yamashita, T. & Kobayashi, S. (2001). Reinforcement Learning of Walking 

Behavior for a Four-legged Robot, 40th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, pp. 

411-416. 
Kimura, H.; Fukuoka, Y. & Katabuti, H. (2005). Mechanical Design of a Quadruped 

l, Tekken3&4" and Navigation System Using Laser Range Sensor, Proceedings of 

International Symposium on Robotics. 
Michalewicz, Z. (1994). Genetic Algorithms + Data Structures = Evolution Programs, Spring- 

Verlag, ISBN-3540580905, New York. 
Shibata, T.; Wada, K.; Saito, T & Tanie, K. (2005). Human Interactive Robot for Psychological 

Enrichment and Therapy, Proceedings of the Symposium on Robot Companions: Hard 

Problems and Open Challenges in Robot-Human Interaction, pp. 98-109. 
Shibata, T.; Mitsui, T.; Wada, K. & Touda, A. (2001). Mental Commit Robot and its 

Application to Therapy of Children, 2001 IEEE/ASME International Conference on 

Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics Proceedings, pp. 1053-1058. 
Son, Y.; Kamano, T.; Yasuno, T.; Suzuki, T. & Harada, H. (2002). Target Tracking Control of 

Quadrupedal Robot Using CPG Network Tuned by Genetic Algorithm, Proceedings 

of 2002 International Symposium on Advanced Control of Industrial Processes, TA2D-4, 

pp. 661-666. 
Suzuki, H.; Nishi, H.; Aburadani, A. & Inoue, S. (2007). Animal Gait Generation for 

Quadrupedal Robot, Proceedings of Second International Conference on Innovative 

Computing, Information and Control, CD-ROM, No. A03-02. 
Wada, K.; Shibata, T.; Saito, T. & Tanie, K. (2004). Effects of Robot- Assisted Activity for 

Elderly People and Nurses at a Day Service Center, Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 92, 

No. 11, pp. 1780-1788. 

17 

Gait Based Directional Bias Detection 
of Four-Legged Walking Robots 

Wei-Chung Teng and Ding-Jie Huang 

National Taiwan University of Science and Technology 

Taipei, Taiwan 

1. Introduction 

As an inevitable trend, more and more robots are designed to be sold as household products 
in recent years. Famous examples like AIBO, RoboSapien, and Kondo, though aiming on 
different functionality respectively, are all affordable by general family. Among the robots 
stated above, four-legged robots have great advantage on locomotion over stair, uneven or 
multilevel floor, and floor with scattered stuff. Four-legged robots can also be used as a 
mechanical mule and are capable of carrying significant payloads, such as BigDog 
manufactured by Boston Dynamics (Raibert et al., 2008). In this chapter, we discuss the 
directional bias problem in depth and introduce an approach to dynamically detect the 
direction bias utilizing gait pattern information and the feedback of accelerator sensor. To 
evaluate how effective this approach is, experiments are performed on two Sony's AIBO 
robots. 

There are lots of research topics of four-legged robots such as balance control, gait 
generation, image recognition, walking bias detection, to name but a few. In this chapter, we 
focus on bias detection technique of four-legged robots. Comparing to mechanical mule, 
AIBO robot is designed to be light weighted and is equipped with plastic hemisphere on its 
feet such that it does not scratch the walking plane such as beech solid wood floor. This 
design is a reasonable result to a household robot, but it also makes the robot not able to 
step firmly, thus produces directional bias even when walking straight on flat and smooth 
plane. Since the directional bias of some AIBO robots is obvious and this kind of bias tends 
to accumulates as long as the robot is walking, it would be nice if there is an algorithm to 
automatically detect and correct the walking directional bias in real-time. 
The most popular sensors used to detect heading direction of robots are video cameras, 
gyroscopes and accelerometers. Most image processing algorithms to detecting directional 
bias are time consuming and require more computing power than accelerometer based 
approaches. Since AIBO does not have gyroscope equipped, we choose to develop our 
algorithm according to accelerometer data. In theory, the distance of bias can be calculated 
by integrating the acceleration twice, but the acceleration data obtained from AIBO is not 
accurate enough to generate trustworthy data. Therefore, another data source is necessary to 
enhance our algorithm. After analyzed the characteristics of the three-axial acceleration 
sensors on AIBO, we confirmed the reliability of three-axial acceleration sensor on AIBO 

278 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

and found the relational model between the acceleration data and the walking gaits. As a 
result, it becomes obvious that the vibration and the axial bias being the main factors that 
cause the difference between integrated data and the real distance. We also observe that 
AIBO vibrates largely at some fixed time point during one gait cycle. It turns out that this 
observation becomes the basis of the bias detection algorithm. 

The following sections are organized as follows. The hardware specification of AIBO robot 
is given at first, then a brief review to related work follows, after then a detailed description 
of developing bias detection algorithm is extended. The process to analyzing the 
acceleration data and how we utilize the statistical data are also explained in this part. 
Finally, we show results of experiments, including the accuracy rate, for the bias detection 
algorithm and give a conclusion. 

2. Brief Description of the AIBO Robot 

AIBO is considered a successful, though not profitable, product as a household four-legged 
robot. As mentioned above, our main experiment platform is AIBO ERS-220A made by 
SONY Corporation. The original design of AIBO is for entertainment purpose and is 
considered as a robot pet which can interact with human. Thus, it has lots of sensors for data 
feedback by which the built-in software utilizes to interact with environment and with its 
owner. The basic hardware specification of AIBO is shown in Table 1. As you may have 
noticed, the 64bit RISC processor and 32 MB main memory is not enough to execute 
complex computation in real-time. This is the main reason we exclude the CMOS camera 
when developing the bias detection algorithm. 

Basic hardware 

64bit RISC Processor. 
32 MB Main memory. 

Actuator 

16 degrees of freedom with a continuous range of 

motion. 

Three for each of the legs, one from head light and 

three from the head. 

Sensor 

Temperature sensor. 

Infrared distance sensor. 

Acceleration sensor. 

Touch sensors(head,f ace,back,legs,tail) . 

Vibration sensor. 

100,000 CMOS image sensor 

Table 1. The hardware specification of AIBO. 

In addition to these various hardware components, SONY also provides a useful software 
framework, the OPEN-R SDK, for developer to develop customized programs. According to 
previous literatures (Wijbenga & van de Sanden, 2004; Hengst et al., 2000 ; Serra & Baillie, 
2003; Rico et al., 2004), AIBO is easy to be controlled and can perform different actions by 
utilizing OPEN-R SDK. With this powerful framework, we can record data from three-axial 
acceleration sensors in AIBO. In the following sections, we discuss more about how to 
analyze these data. 

According to the official document (Sony Corporation, 2004), the positive direction of X, Y 
and Z axis in the acceleration sensor are mapped to right, front and up of the robot 

Gait Based Directional Bias Detection of Four-Legged Walking Robots 279 

respectively, as shown in Fig. 1. We use this definition in the following sections. 
Furthermore, by calculating the greatest common divisor of the collected data, we found 
that each axis has different unit length. The unit length is 0.086784 meter in X axis, 0.169080 
meter in Y axis, and 0.172046 meter in Z axis. Since the unit length is different in three axes 
and it has great effect on the sensitivity of acceleration sensor, we must take this 
characteristic into consideration later. 

For general gaits provided by OPEN-R SDK, the sampling rate of a frame is 125Hz, and 
AIBO takes 140 frames to complete one gait cycle. Thus, it costs 1.12 seconds in total for 
AIBO to execute a whole cycle. Besides, in order to gather more information about the 
walking status of AIBO, we also utilize the touch sensor under each foot. With the help of 
touch sensor's feedback, we can analyze and then can determine abnormal step timings 
according to AIBO's walking pattern. 

Fig. 1. The definition of axes of three-axial acceleration sensor in AIBO 

3. Related Work and Previous Studies 

According to previous studies, the position of a robot can be measured by using acceleration 
sensors (Liu & Pang, 1999). Since the data from acceleration sensors have accumulative error, 
other position information source like GPS can be useful to compensate the error. In 2004, 
one research (Vail & Veloso, 2004) uses acceleration data of AIBO to identify the type of 
surface under the robot as it walks. In addition, the acceleration data is also used to predict 
gait velocity by using a k-nearest neighbor approach. These researches are however focusing 
on measuring walking velocity and distance straight ahead, whereas we have interest only 
in bias of lateral direction. 

As mentioned before, our goal is to find out the directional bias when AIBO is walking. In 
order to find out the directional bias, walking distance is a good starting point. It is 
proposed that low-cost acceleration sensors can be used to measure walking distance of 
human (Cho, 2002). It is observed that data feedback of acceleration sensors have errors due 
to sensor bias, input, axis misalignments, etc. Thus, an algorithm is developed and is 
applied in the measurement system to compensate these errors. Though this study aims on 
the walking pattern of human, it still serves as a good reference. 

On the other hand, one previous study shows that the output of acceleration sensors in the 
AIBO robot is too shaky such that the calculated speed and walking distance do not 

280 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

converge in reasonable bounds (Westermark, 2005). Fortunately, it is still possible to 
determent the relation between actual walking distance and acceleration data by heuristic 
analysis, because acceleration data has some particular characteristics which would be 
affected by walking pattern and the type of walking surface. 

4. The Algorithm to Detect Directional Bias 

4.1 Basic concept before designing the detection algorithm 

At the beginning, we use a naive method, integrating the acceleration data twice, to generate 
distance. As stated by previous study, the integrated data are extremely different from the 
real distance. There are many possible reasons to this difference, and one is that the 
accelerator we use is a defective. Considering the characteristic of each acceleration sensor 
data from three axes, a series of preliminary experiments are designed to check the validity 
of the data, and the flowchart of the research method is illustrated in Fig. 2. For the first step, 
we need to confirm the reliability of three-axial acceleration sensors. We use Matlab 
software package to analyze the results of preliminary experiments. After gathered enough 
data, we then analyze acceleration data of each axis and find out the relation among three- 
axis acceleration sensors. Given the collected data is trustworthy, we may use the result and 
start to develop our method to detect directional bias. 

Confirm the reliability 

of three-axial 

acceleration sensors 

Observe twenty 

acceleration data 

of each axis 

Y-axis acceleration 

Observe the relation 
between each gait cycle 

Z-axis acceleration 

Analysis of axial bias 
and vibration 

I 

Design bias 
detection algorithm 

I 

Verify algorithm 

Fig. 2. Flowchart of the research method 

X-axis acceleration 

Observe actual walk 
made by robot 

Gait Based Directional Bias Detection of Four-Legged Walking Robots 

281 

4.2 Preliminary experiment 

In order to examine the reliability of acceleration data gathered from AIBO, we setup a 
preliminary experiment. The designed experiment is to let AIBO walks for 5 gait cycles on 
top of pasteboard for 20 times. During this experiment, we record the acceleration data of 
each axis and drew all the data into one graph, as Fig. 3 shows. In other words, there are 20 
overlapping record sets in the Fig. 3. We observe that acceleration in X axis is unstable in 
Fig. 3(a), but each gait cycle has similar pattern. For example, there are fixed 10 pulses 
during 5 gait cycles, and they almost happen in the same timing. The same phenomenon can 
be observed in Y-axis and Z-axis, they all have similar pattern during the 5 gait cycles. 
Thus, it is reasonable to conclude that the three-axial acceleration sensor has property of 
specific repeatability. Differences between overlapped data are especially few in the first 
gait cycle, since the 20 lines are very similar to each other. However, after second gait cycle 
the vibrations are increasing caused by unstable walking gait, so each data are getting more 
and more different. Since the three-axial acceleration sensor on AIBO shows acceptable 
reliability, we may step further to analyze each axis data respectively. 

100 200 300 400 500 600 700 

franne(0.008sBc) 

(a) 

£ 
I □ 

$ -10 

"|| ': jk ~ 

T^IHfT 

I I 1 

100 200 300 400 500 600 

franne(0.008sec) 

100 200 300 400 500 600 700 

frame(0.008sac) 

(b) (c) 

Fig. 3. Overlapping the acceleration data in three axes during 5 gait cycles measured 20 
times: (a) X-axis (b) Y-axis (c) Z-axis 

282 Climbing and Walking Robots 

4.3 The characteristics of acceleration sensor 

After confirmed the reliability of three-axial acceleration sensors in AIBO, we start to 
analyze data of each axis. For the first step, we analyze Y-axis acceleration data by 
integrating the acceleration twice directly. As mentioned above, the integrated data are far 
from the real distance measured manually. Hence, we consider that there must be some 
kinds of factors that strongly affect the Y-axis acceleration data. 

So far we can not compute the distance directly by using acceleration data, but the real 
distance has particular relation with the acceleration data. As the result of observation, we 
assume that the physical vibration of robot body during walking and the accompanied axial 
bias may be the main factors that cause the difference between integrated data and the real 
distance. It seems that the factors appear when AIBO is changing its gait step. This is 
because AIBO is on an unstable state when it is changing gait step. For example, the 
physical vibration, almost in vertical direction, occurs in the moment that the left front leg is 
raising up and the left back leg is putting down. This vibration causes the axial bias and a 
pulse. In order to find when the vibration occurs, we need to analyze Z-axis acceleration 
data. 

In the second step, we analyze Z-axis acceleration data by simultaneously comparing the 
acceleration with output of touch sensor on the bottom of each leg. The reading from touch 
sensor is or 1. If the reading of the touch sensor is 0, it means that AIBO is during swing 
phase; otherwise, it means that AIBO is during stance phase. In order to compare the touch 
sensor data with acceleration data in one picture, we add different fixed values on each 
reading of touch sensor. As illustrated in Fig. 4, "o" means the reading from right front 
touch sensor, "" is from left front touch sensor, " \> " is from right back touch sensor, and 
" <1 " means the reading from left back touch sensor. In addition, we find that the timings of 
pulses repeat regularly during the 5 gait cycles. It begins from 0.2 second (the 25th frame), 
and there are pulses every 0.56 second (70 frame). Comparing with each leg phase, the start 
time point 1 in Fig. 4 of these pulses is the time when right front leg is raising up and the 
right back leg is putting down. The time point 2 is the time when left front leg is raising up 
and the left back leg is putting down. Hence, the pulse is caused by the changes between 
two legs on the same side. This kind of vibrations would affect each axial data extremely. 
Thus, the data seem to be unreliable during this unstable period and should not be added to 
the integration. 

Moreover, from Fig. 4 we can observe that AIBO starts its gait in the order of right front, left 
back, left front and right back, which is known as 1-4-2-3 footfall sequence. This gait, as 
shown in Fig. 5, has already applied to lots of research (Schmiedeler & Waldron, 1999; 
Toyomasu & Shinohara, 2003) and is the same with the notion that Hirose and Kunieda 
proposed in 1991 (Bekey, 2005). By observing walking AIBOs, we find that its walking 
direction is straight when it is raising right front leg. When it is putting right front leg down 
and raising left back leg up, it gets the most right position during a single gait. Then it raises 
left front leg and its walking direction is left forward. Eventually when it is putting left front 
leg down and raising right back leg up, it gets the most left position during a single gait. 

Gait Based Directional Bias Detection of Four-Legged Walking Robots 

283 

time point 1 

O right front leg 
+ lett front leg 
> right back leg 
< left back leg 
Z-axis acceleration 

3 
time (sec) 

Fig. 4. Z-axis acceleration data during 5 gait cycles with stepping phases of 4 legs 

Start state 

Leg order 

Right front up Left back up Left front up Right back up 

• • o • • o • • 

o 

Walking direction 

^ 

o 

\ 

R y\ 

X 5\ 

o 

/ 

Fig. 5. Gait order of the AIBO robot with its walking direction in each footfall 

In the third part, we want to know at what frame the vibrations start. We start to analyze X- 
axis acceleration comparing with the trajectory of AIBO. As Fig. 6 shows, the gap between 
dotted lines is the distance during one single gait cycle. The ending points of arrows stand 
for rightmost or leftmost positions during a gait cycle, and the two rectangles represent the 
space occupied by AIBO's body. The arrows point out the most right positions or the most 
left positions. We assume the velocity in X-axis is when AIBO reaches the rightmost and 
the leftmost positions. This is because the instant velocity should be when a robot is in the 
moment of changing its lateral direction. Therefore, we can use this characteristic to reset the 
velocity in X-axis every half gait cycle and integrate data from the next arrow partially. In 
this way we prevent the velocity error in X-axis to accumulate. 

284 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

First cycle 

Second cycle Third cycle 

Fourth cycle 

Start point 

Fig. 6. The walking trajectory of AIBO robot with default gait 

4.4 The bias detection algorithm 

As we has discussed above, it seems reasonable to believe the acceleration sensors on AIBO 
are useful in some degree of accuracy. Nevertheless, we find that AIBO vibrates largely at 
some fixed time points, so it is important to take out the acceleration data while left leg or 
right leg in the swing phase individually. As shown in Fig. 7, according to the observation 
on walking pattern of each leg, data from the 23th to the 63th frame represent the 
acceleration when the right front leg is in the swing phases. And data from the 97th frame to 
the 137th frame represent the acceleration when the left front leg is in the swing phases. By 
integrating this two set of data twice individually and then summing these two values up, 
we can derive a value which we call partial integrating value (PIV). If the PIV is positive, the 
center position of AIBO is going to right position. If the PIV is negative, the center position 
of AIBO is going to left position. Thus, this method is our " single gaited bias detection 
algorithm/ 7 . 

For theX-axis acceleration 

data during a single gait 

cycle 

/ 

Cutting off 97th~137th frames 
of acceleration data 

Integrate twice 

Cutting off 23th~63th frames 
of acceleration data 

\ 

/ 

Integrate twice 

Sum up 
these two values 

I 

Compare with the real 
center position 

Fig. 7. The flowchart of single gait bias detection algorithm 

Gait Based Directional Bias Detection of Four-Legged Walking Robots 

285 

Although we can compute the directional bias of first gait cycle by using this single gait bias 
detection algorithm, we cannot use this method directly to compute second gait cycle. It is 
because that the direction of Y-axis of AIBO might have changed at this time. The PIV value 
of the second gait cycle needs to be further computed with coordinate changes and then 
sums up with the PIV value of the first gait cycle. This concept is explained in Fig. 8 in 
which X l and Y 1 are X-axis bias and Y-axis displacement during the first gait cycle, X 2 and 

Y 2 are accumulated X-axis bias and Y-axis displacement during the second gait cycle. 
Furthermore, X 2 is X-axis bias generated in the second gait cycle by the local reference 
frame at the end of the first gait. The equations below therefore hold: 

XX X 

tanfl =— , tan<9 9 =— ^- and tan0, = — 2- 
Y { Y 2 Y 2 

X;= A /(x 2 2 + 7 2 2 )(sin(^ + ^)) 

(1) 

Position afte 
3rd gait cycle 

Position after" 
2nd gait cycle 

Position after 
1st gait cycle 

Initial position 
Fig. 8. The relative positions between each gait cycle 

As we mentioned before, Y-axis displacement can not be trustworthy for walking distance 
over the first gait. Thus, we take average displacement (8.8cm) of Y-axis displacement from 

286 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

first gait cycle. Then, we let Y l =8.8 and Y 2 =8.8, and use single gait bias detection algorithm 
to find X 1 and X 2 . If we know 0[ and 6 2 , we can compute the real bias X 2 by applying 
equation (1). 6[ is the turning angle of AIBO between Y-axis of original position and Y-axis 
of first gait position. The real bias X 3 during third gait cycle is as followed: 

X3 = A /(x 3 2 +7 3 2 )(sin(^ + 6 2 + 3 )) 

(2) 

6 2 is the turning angle of AIBO between Y-axis of first gait position and Y-axis of first gait 
position. 9[ and 6 2 are further discussed in the next section. 

5. Experiment Results 

To examine the effectiveness of the single gait bias detection algorithm, we gathered all 
sensor reading of a single gait cycle while AIBO walks on the pasteboard and record the 
center position of AIBO, and then repeat this experiment for 30 times. We list the first 10 
records to explain the result of our experiments, as shown in Table 2. The XI field is the X- 
axial position of left front leg, X2 is the X-axial position of left back leg, Xc is the center 
position of AIBO, or the average of XI and X2, DIV is the value directly integrated twice 
from acceleration, and is the bias angle which is computed by XI subtracting X2 and then 
divided by the constant distance (23cm) between front leg and back leg. If the PIV in Table 2 
is positive, it means that the directional bias is right; otherwise, if the PIV in Table 2 is 
negative, it means that the directional bias is left. 

Comparing Xc with DIV, they are different from each other from expl to explO. The values 
of DIV are not only too large but also upside-down in positive-negative sign. Thus, the 
directional bias can not be simply computed by integrating X-axial acceleration. Comparing 
Xc with PIV, there are only two data (exp2 and exp7) in wrong judgment. If the value of Xc 
equal to 0, 6 would help to explain the directional bias. Take exp3 for example, the value of 
is negative, so the directional bias is left, so the maximum error. The other data show that 
the proposed method can determine the directional bias. The correct rate of " single gaited 
bias detection algorithm" is 93.33%, because 28/30 data are correct. 

NO. 

XI 

X2 

Xc 

DIV 

PIV 

expl 

-1.3 

0.7 

-0.3 

7.542884 

-1.9959 

-4.96974 

exp2 

-0.4 

0.6 

0.1 

15.72617 

-0.84257 

-2.48955 

exp3 

-0.5 

0.5 

14.12934 

-0.49655 

-2.48955 

exp4 

-0.8 

0.6 

-0.1 

13.84468 

-0.64595 

-3.48327 

exp5 

-1.2 

0.6 

-0.3 

15.4393 

-0.72316 

-4.4749 

exp6 

-0.5 

0.4 

-0.05 

8.680384 

-0.54403 

-2.24087 

exp7 

-0.6 

0.8 

0.1 

8.871726 

-1.71764 

-3.48327 

exp8 

-0.5 

0.4 

-0.05 

6.40316 

-0.49071 

-2.24087 

exp9 

-0.3 

0.2 

-0.05 

17.49574 

-0.83063 

-1.24536 

explO 

-1.2 

0.6 

-0.3 

9.290792 

-1.34884 

-4.4749 

Table 2. Experimental results (in unit of cm) 

Gait Based Directional Bias Detection of Four-Legged Walking Robots 

287 

The scale factor of X-axis acceleration sensor is 0.086784 mis 2 , so the maximum error is 
±0.043392 mis 2 . The integrated value can be represented as 

\f\t)dt ~ \f(t)dt + Atn 

(3) 

where f\t) is real value, f(t) is the value from acceleration sensor, At is the time of each 
frame, n is a positive integer which is the number of frame, and c is a constant which is the 
constant scale factor. Hence, At-n-c is the error after integration. If we let c = 0.043392, n 
= 140, At is 0.008, and use equation (3) twice, we can get the maximum error ±5.443cm after 
integrated twice. However, the X-axial center position of AIBO drifts from -0.3cm to 0.6cm 
during one single gait cycle. Therefore, it is a great improvement that our method can 
determine the directional bias under such a huge error. 

In order to compute the directional bias of two gait cycles, the bias angle of first gait cycle is 
needed. The value of PIV and the bias angle of first gait cycle have been shown to be 
positively correlated with one another. In fact, the correlation coefficient is 0.855, which is a 
high correlation. Then, we compute the linear regression of them, and with regression 
function the bias angle can be easily transformed from PIV. Therefore, we can use (1) to 
detect the directional bias of two gait cycles. The same method is used to detect three gait 
cycles, four gait cycles, and five gait cycles. 

100.00% 
90.00% 
B0.00% 
70.00% 
60.00% 
50.00% 
40.00% 
30.00% 
20.00% 
10.00% 
0.00% 

^3^55 

R n nnm E6 . 66 % Pv1 nn CE. 

73. 33^ 

12 3 4 5 

Gait cycle number 

Fig. 9. The accuracy rate of the first 5 gait cycles 

We plot the accuracy rate of each cycle from the first five gait cycles unto one graph, as Fig. 
9 shows. The accuracy rate of the first gait cycle is up to 93.33%, so our algorithm can 
determine the correct directional bias generally. It is because that AIBO is in the most stable 
condition, so the robot is rarely affected by any kind of factor. The accuracy rate of second 
gait cycle is 83.33% on the downside, because the AIBO is getting unstable while walking. 
Under unstable condition, the value that our algorithm computes may be affected somehow. 

288 Climbing and Walking Robots 

The accuracy rate of third gait cycle is 73.33%; it means that the result of integration 
accumulates a lot of errors apparently and it causes the downward trend of the accuracy 
rate. However, the accuracy rate of fourth gait cycle goes up again to 86.66%, and the 
accuracy rate of fifth gait cycle is 84%. With Bias Detection Algorithm we can determine the 
directional bias of AIBO in first five gait cycles, and the accuracy rates are all over 73.33%. 
Although the directional bias cannot be determined absolutely, with the low sensitive 
sensors and limited computing power the performance of Bias Detection Algorithm is a 
good improvement. 

6. Conclusion 

We have demonstrated an effective approach to detect the directional bias of walking four- 
legged robots by using acceleration data and gait information. The precision of acceleration 
sensor equipped in AIBO is practical, but the difference between integrated walking 
distance and the actual one is not negligible. After analyzed the data from accelerometer, we 
found that AIBO vibrates largely at some fixed time point, so it is important to take out the 
acceleration data while left leg or right leg in the swing phase individually. 
By observing the walking pattern of each leg, we decided to collect data from two fragments 
of the acceleration data and integrate these two data twice individually. Then, by summing 
these two values up, we get a value that we called it as partial integrating value (PIV). If the 
PIV is positive, the center position of AIBO is going to right position. If the PIV is negative, 
the center position of AIBO is going to left position. In order to make sure the correctness of 
our approach, several experiments were designed and executed. As a result, the accuracy 
rate of this single gaited bias detection algorithm is 93.33%, and the accuracy rate of this 
algorithm within five gaits can be up to 90%. 

7. References 

Bekey, G.A. (2005). Autonomous Robots From Biological Inspiration for Implementation and 

Control. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts 
Cho, S.Y.; Park, C.G. & Jee, G.I. (2002) Measurement System of Walking Distance Using 

Low-cost Accelerometers. Proceedings of The 4th Asian Control Conference, pp. 1799- 

1803, September 2002, Singapore 
Hengst, B.; Ibbotson, D.; Pham, S.B. & Sammut, C. (2000). The UNSW United 2000 Sony 

Legged Robot Software System, University of New South Wales, Australia 
Liu, H. & Pang, G. (1999) Accelerometer for Mobile Robot Positioning. Proceedings Of the 

1999 IEEE Industry Applications Society Conference, vol.3, pp. 1735-1742, Phoenix, AZ, 

USA 
Raibert, M.; Blankespoor, K.; Nelson, G. & Playter, R. (2008). Bigdog, the rough-terrain 

quaduped robot. Proceedings of the 17th International Federation of Automation Control. 

April 2008 
Rico, F.M.; Gonzalez-Careaga, R.; Maria, J.; Plaza, C. & Olivera, V.M. (2004). Programming 

Model Based on Concurrent Objects for the AIBO Robot, Universidad Rey Juan 

Carlos 
Serra, F. & Baillie, J.-C. (2003). Aibo programming Using OPEN-R SDK. Tutorial, ENSTA, 

France 

Gait Based Directional Bias Detection of Four-Legged Walking Robots 289 

Schmiedeler, J.P. & Waldron, K.J. (1999). The Mechanics of Quadrupedal Galloping and the 

Future of Legged Vehicles. The International Journal of Robotics Research, Vol. 18, No. 

12, pp. 1224-1234 
Sony Corporation (2004), OPEN-R SDK 
Toyomasu, M. & Shinohara, A. (2003). Developing Dynamic Gaits for Four Legged Robots. 

Proceedings of The International Symposium on Information Science and Electrical 

Engineering, pp. 577-580 
Vail, D. & Veloso, M. (2004). Learning from Accelerometer Data on a Legged Robot, 

Proceedings of the 5th IFAC/EURON Symposium on Intelligent Autonomous Vehicles, 

Lisbon, Portugal. 
Westermark, S. (2005). Programming tools for AIBO 
Wijbenga, A. & van de Sanden, M. (2004). How To Make AIBO Do Tricks, University of 

Groningen, Netherlands 

290 Climbing and Walking Robots 

18 

Locomotion analysis of hexapod robot 

Xilun Ding, Zhiying Wang, Alberto Rovetta and J.M. Zhu 

Beihang University, Politecnico di Milano 

China, Italy 

1. Introduction 

Multi-legged robots display significant advantages with respect to wheeled ones for 
walking over rough terrain because they do not need continuous contact with the ground. In 
Multi-legged robots, hexapod robots, mechanical vehicles that walk on six legs, have 
attracted considerable attention in recent decades. There are several benefits for hexapods 
rover. 

(a) Hexapod robot is easy to maintain static stability on three or more legs, 

(b) It has a great deal of flexibility in how it can move. 

(c) Hexapod robot is the most efficient one for statically stable walking. Preumount et al. 
1991, observed that a larger number of legs more than six do not increase walking speed. 

(d) Hexapod robots show robustness in case of leg faults 

(e) Hexapods makes it possible for the robot to use one, two or three legs to work as hand 
and perform complex operations. 

The most studied problem for multi-legged robots concerns how to determine the best 
sequence for lifting off and placing the feet (gait/ locomotion planning). From the stability 
point of view, robot locomotion can be classified into dynamic locomotion, such as running 
and hopping, and statically stable locomotion as walking. Statically stable locomotion has 
the constraint that the moving body is stable at all times. The vertical projection of the centre 
of gravity of the robot must be within the convex of the supporting polygon linked positions 
of all supporting feet. 

Statically stable gait is solely dependent on the design of bodies and legs. Hexapod gaits 
have been widely investigated as a function of shape and characteristics of the robot 
structure. In 1985, Kaneko et al. addressed the gait of a rectangular hexapod with decoupled 
freedoms where the propelling motion was generated by one degree of freedom (DOF). In 
1988, Lee et al. realized an omnidirectional walking control system for a rectangular 
hexapod robot with adaptive suspension. A circular gait was studied for a layered hexapod 
robot (called Ambler) at the Carnegie Mellon University [Bares et al., 1989; Krotkov & Bares, 
1991; Wettergreen, 1990] with rotating legs connected to the same vertical axis at six different 
heights. Hirose et al. in 1992 and 1998 and Gurocak in 1998 developed other two hexapods 
whose bodies were consisting of two different layers, each connected to three legs. The 
relative motion of the layers realized the omnidirectional robot gait in a simple way, but 
limiting the walking capability under leg faults. Two Lees in 2001 studied the gait of a 
special robot whose body was composed of three parts connected by revolute joints. Its 

292 Climbing and Walking Robots 

flexible gait allowed it to overcome complex terrains, but its configuration was quite 
complicate for control system design. R Hex, introduced by Uluc et al. in 2001, is another 
hexapod robot with half-circle legs with a simple alternate tripod gait. 

Most popular hexapods can be grouped into two categories, rectangular and hexagonal 
ones. Rectangular hexapods have a rectangular body with two groups of three legs 
distributed symmetrically on the two sides. Hexagonal hexapods have a round or hexagonal 
body with evenly distributed legs. 

The gait of rectangular six-legged robots has motivated a number of theoretical researches 
and experiments which nowadays reached to some extent a state of maturity. In 1998 Lee et 
al. showed for rectangular hexapods the longitudinal stability margin, which is defined as 
the shortest distance from the vertical projection of center of gravity to the boundaries of the 
support pattern in the horizontal plane, of straight-line motion and crab walking. Song 
&Choi in 1990 defined the duty factor (3 as the fraction of cycle time in which a leg is in the 
supporting phase and they proved that the wave gait is optimally stable among all periodic 
and regular gaits for rectangular hexapods when 3/4 <(3<1. Both the tripod gait and the 
problem of turning around a fixed point on an even terrain have been widely investigated 
and tested for a general rectangular hexapod with three DOF legs [Wang, 2005 and Su, 
2004]. The so called 4+2 quadruped gaits [Huang and Nonami, 2003] have been 
demonstrated being able to tolerate faults [Yang & Kim, 1999]. A series of fault-tolerant gaits 
for hexapods were analyzed by Yang et al. [Yang & Kim, 1998a, 1998b, 2000 and 2003]. Their 
aim was to maintain the stability in case a fault event prevented a leg from supporting the 
robot. In 1975, Kugushev and Jaroshevskij proposed a terrain adaptive free gait that was 
non-periodic. McGhee et al. in and other researchers [Porta & Celaya, 2004; Erden & 
Leblebicioglu] went on studying free gaits of rectangular hexapod robots. 
At the same time, the hexagonal hexapod robots were studied with inspiration from the 
insect family, demonstrate better performances for some aspects than rectangular robots. 
Kamikawa et al. in 2004 confirmed the ability to walk up and down a slope with the tripod 
gait by building a virtual smooth surface that approximates the exact ground. Yoneda et al. 
in 1997 enhanced the results of Song & Choi in 1990, developing a time-varying wave gait 
for hexagonal robots, in which velocity, duty factor and crab angle are changed according to 
terrain conditions. A. Preumon et al. in 1991 proved that hexagonal hexapods can easily 
steer in all directions and that they have longer stability margin, but he did not give a 
detailed theoretical analysis. Takahashi et al. in 2000 found that hexagonal robots rotate and 
move in all directions at the same time better than rectangular ones by comparing stability 
margin and stroke in wave gait, but no experimental results were presented. Chu and Pang 
in 2002 compared the fault tolerant gait and the 4+2 gait for two types of hexapods of the 
same size. They proved theoretically that hexagonal hexapod robots have superior stability 
margin, stride and turning ability compared to rectangular robots. 

It is also worth to mention here a work carried out by Gonzale de Santos et al. [Gonzale de 
Santos et al., 2007a and Gonzale de Santos et al., 2007b]. They optimized the structure of 
rectangular hexapods and found that extending the length of middle legs of rectangular 
robots helps in saving energy. This outcome can be seen as a transition from rectangular six- 
legged robots to hexagonal ones. 

Locomotion analysis of hexapod robot 293 

2. Definitions 

Several definitions are necessary to be introduced before locomotion planning. 

Support/ stance phase: a leg is said in its supporting/ stance phase when it stands 

on the ground and its foot does not leave the ground. 

Transfer/ swing phase: a leg is said in its transferring/ swing phase when it does 

not stand on the ground but move in the air. 

Gait period/ cycle time, T: a gait period/ cycle time is a complete cycle of a leg 

including supporting phase and transferring phase. 

Duty factor p: the duty factor p is the time fraction of stance phase of a leg to the 

cycle time T. /?= T S j/Tj where T s ; denotes time of supporting phase of leg z; T; denotes 

circle time of leg i. 

5) Stroke length: the distance that the body moves thought the support phase of a leg. 

6) Stride length: stride length is the distance the centre of gravity (COG) translates 
during one complete locomotion cycle. 

Pitch length: the distance between the centers of the strokes of the isoceles legs. 
Supporting polygon/ pattern: the polygon the vertices of which are constructed on 
the horizontal plane by vertical projections of the foot-ground interaction points. 

9) Statically stability margin (SSM): stability margin was defined for a given support 
polygon as the smallest of the distances from the COG. projection to the edges of 
the support polygon. 

10) Longitudinal stability margin (LSM): the smallest of the distances from the COG. 
projection to the front and rear edges of the support polygon along the machine's 
longitudinal axis. 

11) Crab Longitudinal Stability Margin (CLSM): The smallest of the distances from the 
COG. projection to the front and rear edges of the support polygon along the 
machine's motion axis. 

12) Main walking direction stability margin (MDSM):the smallest of distance from 
projection of the C.G. to the front and rear edges of the support polygon along the 
main-walking direction 

13) Kinematics margin: kinematics margin is defined as the distance from the current 
foothold of leg i to the boundary of the reachable area of leg i, measured in the 
opposite direction of body motion. 

14) Periodic gait: a gait is periodic if similar states of the same leg during successive 
strokes occur at the same interval for all legs, that interval being the cycle time. 

15) Symmetric gait: a gait is symmetric if the motion of legs of any right-left pair is 
exactly half a cycle out of phase. 

16) Regular gait: A gait is said to be regular if all the legs have the same duty factor. 

17) Body height: body height is the distance of the body center of mass from the 
support surface along the body vertical axis. 

18) Protraction of leg: protraction is the forward movement of a leg relative to the body 
and ground. 

19) Retraction of leg: retraction is the backward movement of a leg relative to the body 
with no movement of the leg relative to the ground. 

20) Lateral offset: Lateral offset is the shortest distance between vertical projection of 
hip on the ground and the corresponding track. 

294 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

21) Crab angle: it is defined as the angel from the longitudinal axis to the direction 
motion, which has the positive measure in the anti-clockwise direction. 

3. Mechanism of Hexapods 

Typical hexapod robots can be classified into rectangular and hexagonal ones (Fig.l). 
Rectangular hexapods inspired from insects have six legs distributed symmetrically along 
two sides, each side having three legs. Hexagonal hexapods have six legs distributed 
axisymmetrically around the body (that can be hexagonal or circular). 

Fig. 1. Two types of hexapod robots 

Fig. 2. Beetle's Structure 

Typically, individual legs range from two to six degrees of freedom. Fichters [Fichter, E.F. & 
Fichter, B.L., 1988] have made a survey on insects' legs (Fig.2 as an example). They found 
that a general insect leg has four main segments: coxa, femur, tibia and tarsus. Most of the 
length of an insect leg is contributed by 2 long and nearly equally segments. The hinge joint 

Locomotion analysis of hexapod robot 

295 

between these segments allows one to fold back almost exactly along the other. Length of 
the tibia is highly correlated with that of the femur, the correlation coefficient ranges from 
0.97 to 0.78. The coxa has no obvious correlation with femur or tibia. Similarly, the thigh and 
calf of mammals (dog for example in Fig.3) and human are almost equal. We will mainly 
talk about the locomotion of hexapod robots with leg structure in Fig.4. Three parts are 
connected together by two parallel revolute joints with rotating axes parallel to the ground, 
coax and knee. When all joints are at zero position, the link calf is perpendicular to the 
ground and the link thigh and calf are parallel to the ground. The hip is connected to the 
body by the waist joint that rotates around a vertical axis. 

SKELETON OF A DOG 

cervical 
vertebrae 

carpus 
metacarpus 

phafange 

Fovisual.inFo 

Fig. 3. Dog's Structure 

/ 

:. 

J~" 

z L , 

Y T 

J Li J coxa 

o,„ c 

V'Hip /7 ^> 

Thigh ^A X L} 

Jb ^--o.._5 

6 

"^--^ 

Ci 

■'knee*/'^ ~\ 

&L 

*-*i 

X/ ' 

Z Fi 

/ .?= /' 

Y Fi 

/ 

" /J 

" s / Y 

1 fjjm 

Fig. 4. General structure of a 3DOF (degrees of freedom) leg 

296 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

4. Normal statically stable gaits 

A hexapod has many types of statically stable gaits, such as regular gait, irregular gaits, 
periodic gaits and et al. 

As for the regular periodic gaits, its gaits can be classified, according to the number of 
supporting legs during support phase, as 3 + 3 tripod gait with 3 supporting legs, 4 + 2 
quadruped gait with four supporting legs and 5 +1 one by one gait with five supporting 
legs; according to the movement of legs, insect-wave gait which is the typical gait of 
rectangular six-legged robots, mammal-kick gait which is typical gait of rectangular 
quadruped robots and mixed gait which is typical multi-directional gait for hexagonal 
hexapod robots; the combination can be tripod insect-wave gait and so on. The typical 
irregular gait is so called free gait. 

4.1 3+3 tripod gait 

The tripod continuous gaits are characterized by having three legs standing on the ground 
for supporting and pushing the body forward, and the other three legs lifting off and 
swinging forward. In each gait period, the body moves two steps. The quickest tripod gait is 
when the duty factor p equals 1/2. 

(a) Initial configuration (2D, insect) (b) Legs' movement sequence example 

Fig. 5. Insect- wave tripod gait 

Main wrajk iflg 

L* S 3 

i*B*— J 

L*g5 

^-^ 

777/ 

777777 

(a) Initial configuration (2D, mixed) (b) Legs' movement sequence example 

Fig. 6. Mammal-kick tripod gait 

Locomotion analysis of hexapod robot 

297 

In the initial configurations of insect-wave gait (see Fig.5) and mammal gait (see Fig.6), six 
legs of the robot are grouped into two and distributed along two sides as that of rectangular 
hexapod robots. Each group has three legs parallel. In Fig.5 (a) and Fig.6 (a). The positions of 
all waist joints are 0, -30, 30, 0, -30 and 30 degrees from leg 1 to leg 6, other joints angles are 
zeros. 

The insect wave gait is characterized by a forward wave of stepping actions on each side of the 
body with a half -cycle phase shift between the two members of any right or left pair [63]. A 
scheme of the robot is sketched in Fig.5 (a), where the main direction of the movement, defined 
as main walking direction, is downwards, with legs swinging forward. Fig.4 (b) shows an 
example of legs sequence. In Fig.5 (b), the thick dashed or solid lines denote supporting legs. 
In the first step, leg 1, leg 3 and leg 5 are in stance phase and push the body forward; while leg 
2, leg 4 and leg 6 swing ahead. In the second step, leg 2, leg 4 and leg 6 are in support phase 
and are responsible for pushing the body forward; leg 1, leg 3 and leg 5 then change to swing 
phase. After this, the procedure repeats again from the first step to the second step. The whole 
cycle includes two steps and the body is moved twice. In every step, the support polygon is an 
isosceles triangle AABC. The stroke length of supporting legs must make sure the gravity 
center of robot stays in side the support polygon, that means not surpass the stability margin. 
In the mammal-kick gait legs generally move in a vertical plane like human's kicking out 
and trajectories of feet are along legs (Fig.6 (b)). The scheme of mammal-kick gait is depicted 
in Fig.6, and it walks mainly from left to right. The waist-joints do not work during mammal 
straight forward walking, but for turning. The support polygon is similar as with insect- 
wave gait and is an isosceles triangle AABC. During walking the front supporting legs 
retract and the rare supporting legs protrude so that the body is moving forward; on the 
contrary, the front swing legs are protrude and the rare swing legs retract. The legs' moving 
sequence is the same at that in insect-wave gait. The difference is just the configurations. 

(a) Initial configuration (2D) 
Fig. 7. Insect-mammal mixed tripod gait 

(b) leg sequence 

In addition to the periodic tripod gaits mentioned above, we introduce here new type of 
mixed gait. In the initial configuration (see Fig. 7) of insect-mammal mixed gait, all joint- 
angles are zeros. During walking, the mixed gait has a supporting area defined as a convex 
polygon connected all supporting legs, in the form of an equilateral triangle AABC or ADEF 

298 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

in Fig.7 (a)). The dark point in Fig.7 (b) is the gravity centre of the body. In every half period, 
one leg kicks off and two legs wave as insect-wave gait. Fig.7 (b) describes the walking 
sequence and 2D configuration of legs of the mixed gait. The legs' movement sequences are 
same as in other two gaits. The main walking direction is along the longitudinal axis of hip 
of leading leg, as shown in Fig.7. 

From Fig.5 to Fig.7, it is can be seen that, for a given robot, the insect wave gait has the same 
size of supporting area AABC as the mammal gait; on the other hand, the mixed gait has the 
largest supporting area. In order to make a detail analysis, Song, Waldron and Choi in [Song 
and Choi, 1990] and [Song and Waldron, 1989] proved that wave gait has the optimum 
stability among all hexapod periodic and regular gaits in the range of 1/2<P<1. While this is 
true for rectangular hexapod robots, it does not hold for hexagonal ones. The statically 
stability margin (SSM) and main-direction stability margin (MDSAfy of three statically stable 
and continuous tripod gaits are compared based on one hexagonal hexapod robot whose 
parameters are listed in table 1. The stability results are reported in table 2 and table 3 
respectively. In table 2 and table 3, the body heights, the distance from the bottom of the 
bodies to the ground, keep constant as length of calf (fe); each link is assumed as a line and 
each joint is assumed as a point. 

Each leg 

Body 

Hip 

Thigh 

Calf 

Mass, 
kg 

m t =0.SC 

mo=2.0C 

m 3 =2.0Q 

m 6 =10.9 

Length. 

1,=0.09 

U=0,30 

b=0.30 

r b =0.36 

Table 1. Main physical parameters of hexapod robot example 

definition 

formula 

H ex x apod robot example 

MDSM, m 

Kinematic 
Limitation, m 

Insect- wave 
gait 

min (OE, OF) 
in Fig. 5 (a) 

0.1471 

> 0.20 

Mammal-kick 
gait 

min (OG, OA) 
in Fig. 6 (a) 

*12 + f 

0.5700 

0,2196 

Insect- mammal 
Mixed gait 

min (OE, OC) 
in Fig.7 (a) 

\{n + h*) 

3750 

0.2196 

Table 2. MDSM of different tripod gaits ((3 = 1/2) 

definition 

formula 

hexapod ro- 
bot example 

Insect- wave 
gait 

min(OD f OG, OH ) 
in Fig.5 (a) 

^ 6 :r s -; :2 : 

.1 724m 

-V ?; -;~- ^ ? : -*-:'-: 

Mammal -kick 

gait 

min(OD f OE f OCT) 
in Fig. 6 (a) 

\ : ?r,:rt-h») 

0.1724m 

2 v /3r;+4,'^-ts7 l2 r i 

Insect- mammal 
Mixed gait 

mmfOD, OE f OF) 
in Fig.7 (a) 

£(*■* + *12) 

0.3750 m 

Table 3. SSM of different tripod gaits (p = 1/2) 

Locomotion analysis of hexapod robot 299 

As shown in table 2, the mammal-kick gait has the biggest MDSM but it loses this advantage 
because of kinematics limitation; the insect-wave gait has the smallest possible stride 
(14.71cm for the example) along main walking direction whereas the other two gaits have 
the same and much bigger possible stride. Synthetically, the insect-mammal mixed gait is 
optimally stable for hexagonal hexapod robots when (3=1/2 and has stability advantage over 
the other two gaits while turning because of the biggest SSM. 

Fig. 8. 60 degree turning with inset-wave gait 

Small angle turnings are easy for all three gaits. However, insect-wave gait needs special 
gaits to realize big-angle turning as stated in [Chu & Pang, 2002], [Wang, 2005] and [Zhang 
& Song, 1991], the same for mammal gait [Wang et al., 2007]. They have to stop and adjust 
legs at first for some big-angle turnings. Fig.8 shows examples of turning 60 degrees with 
insect or mammal gait. From the initial configuration in Fig.8 (a), the robot spends three 
steps to realize 60° turning. Quadrangles are supporting polygons. On the other hand, 
insect-mammal mixed gait can have big advantage on big-angle turning, especially at ±60 °, 
±120 ° and 180 °. With insect-mammal mixed gait, the robot just needs to reselect the leading 
leg for turning at ±60 °, ±120 ° and 180 °, plus adjustment of crab angle it can realize any 
angle turning without stopping. 

In the following Fig.9, Fig.10 and Fig.ll, R and S denote revolute and spherical joint 
respectively; f, k, c and w denote foot, knee, coxa and waist, respectively. For instance, Re 
specifies that the coxa is a revolute joint; Sf tells that between foot and ground, a virtual 
spherical joint is assumed. 

300 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 9. Simplified structure with insect- wave gait 

gjV _% ft 

Jb \ 

fj--- tf— -o * 

Main walking 
Direction 

a l """ n~ — n ~ -M_-Hf 

7 Stride 

Fig. 10. Simplified structure with mammal-kick tripod gait 

^ v Mai n Walking. 

*» direction 

— o — o-^|c 

Fig. 11. Simplified structure with insect-mammal mixed tripod gait 

In the insect wave gait, the waist joints are the most active joints during walking, and each 
foot needs three DOFs. The connection between each foot and the ground can be considered 
as a spherical joint (Sf in Fig.9.). The similar as insect wave gait, in mixed gait. The 
connection between each foot and the ground can be considered as a spherical joint (Sf in 
Fig.ll). From the simplified structure, the mammal gait is easy to control. However, all legs 
with insect-wave gait have the same trajectories. It is therefore easiest to control. Just in 
insect-mammal gait, legs have different trajectory, but symmetric legs still have same 
trajectories. 

Locomotion analysis of hexapod robot 301 

3.2 4+2 quadruped gait 

The rectangular hexapod robot has another type of gait, the "4+2" gait [Chu & Pang, 2002]. 
For this gait the legs are grouped into three groups. Every time there are four legs (two 
groups) standing on the ground to support the body, two other legs rise and walk ahead. In 
one gait period, there are three steps and the body moves only one step. The duty factor is 
2/3. The hexagonal six-legged robot also has this gait with same leg sequences as that of a 
rectangular hexapod. One example can be: 

1) Lifts leg 1 and leg 4, other legs support and push the body; 

2) Leg 2 and leg 5 swing forward, all others support and push the body; 

3) Leg 3 and leg 6 swing forward, the body is moved by others another step. 

4) repeat procedure from 1) to 3). 

This gait shows fault tolerant ability under certain conditions [Yang & Kim, 1998; Yang & 
Kim, 1999; Huang & Nonami, 2003; Chu & Pang, 2002], because three legs can support the 
body even if one supporting leg broken during walking. Chu and Pang had proved that the 
hexagonal robot by this gait has advantages compared with rectangular ones in stability, 
stride and turning ability, if the turning angle is within [-30 30] degrees. 

3.3 5 + 1 one by one gait 

The rectangular hexapod robot has another type of gait, the "4+2" gait [Chu & Pang, 2002]. 
For this gait the legs are grouped into three groups. Every time there are four legs (two 
groups) standing on the ground to support the body, two other legs rise and walk ahead. In 
one gait period, there are three steps and the body moves only one step. The duty factor is 
2/3. The hexagonal six-legged robot also has three types' gaits with same leg sequences as 
that of a rectangular hexapod. 

The leg-sequence of one by one gait can by any order, but generally legs move one after 
another following a clockwise or anti-clockwise order. 

3.4 Free gait 

Free gait proposed by Kugushev and Jaroshevskij in 1975 is characterized as non-periodic, 
non-regular, non-sy metric and terrain adaptive. In a free gait, the leg sequence (i.e., the 
order in which leg transferences are executed), footholds, and body motions are planned in 
a nonfixed, but flexible way as a function of the trajectory, the ground features, and the 
machine's state. It is more flexible and adaptive than periodic and regular gaits on 
complicated terrain. A large number of free gaits for quadruped and hexapod robots have 
been developed to date. For more information, we can refer to [Pal & Jayaraian, 1990; Porta 
& Celaya, 2004; Estremera & Gonzalez de Santos, 2003 and 2005]. 

4. Fault tolerant gait 

In arduous operating environments, robots may confront accidents and damage their legs; 
their legs may be dual-used as arms for some tasks, or some joints may suffer loss of control 
etc. In such cases, biped or quadruped robots would become statically unstable. However 
hexapods may still walk with static stable because their six legs provide redundancy. In this 
subsection we discuss these fault tolerant gaits. 

302 Climbing and Walking Robots 

4.1 Joint-lock 

In this case, Yang [Yang, 2003] has already proposed a discontinuous tripod gait for 
rectangular hexapod robots. 

However, with joint-lock a hexagonal hexapod may still maintain a continuous gait. The 
three possibilities for a single locked joint on one leg are discussed in the following. 

1) Waist-joint-lock. In this case, the faulty leg cannot move in a horizontal plane, but it 
can swing in a vertical plane. The insect wave gait is difficult for this situation; 
whereas the mammal gait is still available by adjusting the other legs in parallel with 
the faulty leg. Also the mixed gait is possible if we chose the broken leg as the leading 
leg or the leg opposite as healing leg. 

2) Knee or coax-joint-lock. For these two cases, the mammal gait and mixed gait are 
impossible to realize, but the insect gait is feasible, although not as efficient as before 
injury. If one whole leg is locked, the discontinuous tripod gait can be employed. 

4.2 Loss of one leg 

In the case of loss of one leg is due to fault or use for other tasks; two possibilities were 
considered in [Yang & Kim, 1998]. However, for symmetric hexagonal robot, there is only 
one case because the structure of every leg is the same and distributed evenly around the 
body. The 2+1+2 gait has same sequence as [Yang & Kim, 1998]. The difference is in the 
positions the leg. The legs of the gaits in [Yang & Kim, 1998] are overlapping. The 
symmetrical hexapod robot needs three steps to achieve this walk. During this procedure, 
the robot's body moves two steps. 

4.3 Loss of two legs 

There are three cases where two legs are either faulty or being used for other tasks. The 
positions of these two unavailable legs may be opposite, adjacent or separated-by-one (two 
damaged separated by one normal leg). Some studies [Takahashi et al., 2000] have been 
done in the first case, but there is a lack of study on the other two cases. 

1) The opposite-legs case. Losing two opposite legs, for example, leg i and leg ; the 
hexapod robot becomes a quadruped robot. It can walk with one of quadruped gaits, 
which have been widely studied. For example, the craw gait (Chen et al. 2006), the 
diagonal gait (Hirose & Matins, 1989), mammal-type "3+l"gait (Tsujita et al. 2001), 
"3+l"craw gait (Chen et al., 2006) which maintains static stability at each step, and 
the omni-directional updated quadruped free gait in [Estremara & Gonzalez de 
Santos, 2002; Estremara & Gonzalez de Santos, 2005]. 

2) The two-separated-by-one case and adjacent case. For these two cases the two 
unavailable legs are on the same side therefore it is almost impossible for a general 
rectangular hexapod robot to have statically stable locomotion. For a hexagonal robot 
the insect wave periodic gait is still available. The other four legs can be adjusted to 
suitable initial positions, as shown in Fig.12 for example. Fig.12 (a) is the case of 
losing leg 1 and leg 3. Fig.12 (b) shows the case where leg 1 and leg 2 are unavailable. 
Following the four-leg periodic gait sequence, robots can realize statically stable 
walking. The crab angle will be different. For example, if leg 1 and leg 2 or leg 1 and 
leg 3 are unusable, the crab angle will be -n/6. Fig. 13 lists the leg sequences for a 
separated-by-one fault tolerant gait. At each instant, there are three or four legs 
supporting the body. The mass centre is inside the supporting area. 

Locomotion analysis of hexapod robot 

303 

For the adjacent case, the leg sequence is similar to the separated-by-one case after adjusting 
to suitable initial positions. 

Fig. 12 Initial state of four legs 

To realize statically stable walking, there are several requirements in Fig.13: 

i)£E = EF = e? ==5IF==£ ; 

2)1 ; 

3)G = flft =: S: , the body stride; 

4) &< & f a^= GuH/ 7 ; 

5) En:=n7=^=.CT=.*te(|J 

The rules for the quadruped insect wave gait are: 

1) Rear legs (leg 4 and leg 5 in Fig.13) must not cross the central line (the point-dashed 

line in Fig. 6-1 6) while moving ahead, so that the mass centre will also be in the 
subsequent supporting area. 

2) Front legs (leg 1 and leg 2 in Fig.13) should not go back to the central line while the 
body (centre of mass) is moving ahead. 

3) The stride of the swing legs is twice that of the body. 

304 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

(a) Swing rear right leg, leg 5 (b) Swing front right leg, leg6 
Supporting area is EFH Supporting area is EFG" 

(c) Move body (d) Swing rear left leg, leg4 

Supporting area is nEFG"H" Supporting area is FG"H" 

(e) Swing front left leg, leg2 (f) Move body again 
Supporting area is E" G"H" Supporting area is nE" F"G"H" 

Fig. 13. Leg sequences of separated-by-one case fault tolerant gait while two legs are broken 

Locomotion analysis of hexapod robot 305 

From the initial configuration of mixed gait to the fault tolerant initial state (Fig.12), we can 
adjust the legs according to following procedures (Equation 1 to Equation 8). 
If two faults occur on two legs that separated by one, for example leg 1 and leg 3, the 
following procedure can be used to move the other legs from the original initial-positions to 
the fault tolerant initial-positions: 

Leg 2 moves from P2 to F with stride F^F (Equation (1)) and rotates by angle 62 (Equation 

(2)) ; Leg 4 moves from P4 to E with stride F-ifl (Equation (3)) and rotates by angle 64 

(Equation (4)) ; Leg 5 moves from P5 to G with stride ^a " (Equation (5)) and rotates by 

angle 65 (Equation (6)); Leg 6 moves from P6 to F with stride FgJl (Equation (7)) and rotates 
by angle 06 (Equation (8)). 

P 2 F = J(Zsin(-)) 2 +(£-(/, + / 2 )cos(-)) 2 

P 4 E = J((/, + / 2 ) - Zcos(-)) 2 + (Isin(-)) 2 

p H = J (/.+/- Z + Rcos(—)Y + (i?sin(— ) - s) 

(1) 

L-(h+l 2 )cos(-) (2 ) 

2 = atan( ^-) - - 

Lsin(— ) 
3 

(3) 

L sin(— ) 
4 = atan( 2 ) ( > 

(/,+/ 2 )-Lcos(y) 

p 5 g = Ml - (/, + / 2 ) cos(y)) 2 + ((/, + 1 2 ) sin( j) - s) 2 ( 5 ) 

L-(/ 1+ / 2 )cos(-) 

s = £. _ atan( L_) (6) 

6 • 7r 

(/, +/ 2 )sin(— )-5 

9 =(4f-atan( 3 )) (8) 

6 v 3 7 +/ 2 -ZHhRcos(|r l ; 

K , (7) 

306 Climbing and Walking Robots 

For the adjacent-legs case, the only difference is for the leg between the two faulty legs, leg 3 
for example. The foot tip of leg 3 will move from P3 to F with the following stride and 
rotation angle, 

P 3 F = x \{(l x +l 2 -L + Rcos(-)f + (*sin(-)) 

^sin(f) 

6L=-f+atan( 3 — ) , im 

3 3 7 l+ / 2 -Z+i?cosqy ( 10 ) 

n 
In the above equations, R sin(— ) < L < L + L . 

3 

D. Loss of more than two legs 

If more than two legs are lost, the robot is unable to maintain static stability while walking. 
Dynamic gaits may still be possible, such as the three-leg dynamics gait of Lee and Hirose, 
2000. These will not be discussed further here. 

5. Conclusion 

In this chapter, the locomotion of symmetric hexapods has been studied in detail. We have 
presented a comprehensive study of hexagonal hexapod gaits including normal and fault 
tolerant ones. Gaits of rectangular and hexagonal six-legged robots have been compared 
from several aspects: stability, fault tolerance, terrain adaptability and walking ability. To 
facilitate simulations and experiments we have provided integrated kinematics of swinging 
and supporting legs for continuous gaits. 

Hexagonal hexapod robots have been shown to be more flexible than rectangular ones. 
Moreover, hexagonal hexapods have many feasible gaits. In addition to the well-know 
insect gait and mammal gait, a new mixed gait for hexagonal six-legged robots has been 
proposed in this chapter which entails some features of both insect and mammal gaits. 
Except classified by legs movement as mentioned above, hexapod robots gaits are 
categorized according to the number of supporting legs during walking, as 3+3 tripod, 4+2 
fault tolerant quadruped, and 5+1 one by one gaits. On account to the introduction of mixed 
gait, each numbered gait has one more form. Among three tripod-gait forms, the most stable 
is the mixed one. The mammal gait can reach the longest stride; whereas the continuous 
insect gait has the shortest maximum stride and poorest stability. 

Thanks to their six legs, hexapod robots have redundancy and fault tolerance. Gaits where 
one leg is lost or two opposite legs are lost have been discussed in recent times. In this 
chapter we have tackled also the cases in which two adjacent legs or two separated by a 
normal leg are damaged. Algorithms for realizing these two fault-tolerant gaits have been 
detailed and validated with simulations. 

Locomotion analysis of hexapod robot 307 

6. References 

Bares, J.; Hebert, M. et al. (1989). Ambler- An Autonomous Rover for Planetary Exploration. 

IEEE Computer, pp. 18-26(1989). 
Chen, J. J.; Peattie, A. M. et al. (2006). Differential leg function in a sprawled-posture 

quadrupedal trotter. The Journal of Experimental Biology, Vol. 209, pp. 249- 

259(2006). 
Chen, X.D.; Yi, S. & Jia, W.C. (2006). Motion Planning and Control of Multilegged Walking 

Robots. Publishing Press of Huazhong University of Technology and Science, Jun. 

2006(1). 
Chu, S. K.-K. & Pang, G. K.-H. (2002). Comparison Between Different Model of Hexapod 

Robot in Fault-Tolerant Gait. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 

Part A, Vol. 32, Issue 6, Nov. 2002 pp. 752 - 756. 
Erden M.S. and Leblebiciolu K. (2008). Freegait generation with reinforcement learning for 

a six-legged robot. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Vol. 56 pp. 199—212(2008). 
Estremera, J. & Gonzalez de Santos, P. (2002). Free Gaits for Quadruped Robots Over 

Irregular Terrain. The International Journal of Robotics Research, Vol. 21, No. 2, 

Feb, 2002, pp. 115-130. 
Estremera, J. & Gonzalez de Santos, P. (2005). Gnerating continuous free crab gaits for 

quadruped robots on irregular terrain. IEEE Transactions on robotics, Vol.21, No.6, 

pp.l067-1076(2005). 
Fitcher, E.F. Fichter, B.L. (1988). A survey of legs of insects and spiders from a kinematic 

perspective. Proceedings., 1988 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 

Automation, 1988., vol. 2, (24-29 Apr 1988), pp. 984-986. 
Gonzalez de Santos, P.; Jcobano, A.; Garcia E. et al. (2007). A Six-legged Robot-based System 

for Humanitarian Demining Missions. Mechatronics, Vol. 17, pp. 417-430(2007). 
Gonzalez de Santos, P.; Garcia, E. &Estremera J. (2007). Improving Walking-robot 

Performances by Optimizing Leg Distribution. Autonomous Robots, Vol.23, No.4, 

pp.247-258(2007). 
Gurocak, H. B.; Peabody J. (1998). Design of a Robot that Walks in Any Direction. Journal of 

Robotic Systems, 15(2), pp. 75-83(1998). 
Hirose, S.; Homma, K.; Matsuzawa S. & Hayakawa S. (1992). Parallel Link Walking Vehicle 

and Its Basic Experiments. 6th Symposium on intelligent Mobile Robots, pp. 7-8 

(1992 in Japanese). 
Hirose, S. A & Martins, F. (1989). Generalized standard leg trajectory for quadruped waking 

vehicle. Trans. Soc. Instrument Control Eng., 25(4), pp. 455-46(1989). 
Huang Q.-J. and Nonami K. (2003). Humanitarian mine detecting six-legged walking robot 

and hybrid neuro walking control with position/ force control, Mechatronics, Vol. 

13 pp. 773-790(2003). 
Kamikawa, K.; Arai, T. et al. (2004). Omni-Directional Gait of Multi-Legged Rescue Robot. 

Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 

Automation, New Orleans, LA - 4111, pp. 2171-2176(2004). 
Kaneko, M.; Abe M.and & Tanie K. (1985). A Hexapod Walking Machine with Decoupled 

Freedoms. IEEE Journal of Robotics and Automation, Vol. RA-1, No. 4, (December 

1985), pp. 183-190. 

308 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Koyachi, N.; Ami,T. et al. (1995). Hexapod with Integrated Limb Mechanism of Leg and 

Arm. IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation Vol. 2, 21-27 

May 1995 pp. 1952 - 1957. 
Krotkov, E.; Bares J. and et al. (1991). Ambler: A six-legged planetary rover. Fifth 

international conference on advanced robotics-91 ICAR, pp. 717-722, (1991). 
Kugushev E.I. and Jaroshevskij V.S. (1975). Problem of selecting a gait for an integrated 

locomotion robot. Process Fourth International conference. Artificial Intelligence, 

Tbilisi, Georgian SSR, USSR, Sept. 1975, pp. 789-793. 
Lee B.-H. & Lee I.-K. (2001). The implementation of the gait and body structure for hexapod 

robot. IEEE International Symposium on Industrial Electronics ISIE 2001., Vol. 3, 

12-16 (June 2001) pp.1959 - 1964. 
Lee T.T.; Liao CM. & Chen T.K. (1988). On the Stability Properties of Hexapod Tripod Gait. 

IEEE Journal of robotics and automation, Vol. 4. NO. 4. August, 1988, pp. 427-434. 
Lee W.-J., Orin D.E. (1988). Omni-directional supervisory control of a multi-legged vehicle 

using periodic gait. IEEE Journal of Robotics and Automation, Vol. 4, Issue 6, (Dec. 

1988) pp. 635 - 642. 
Lee, Y.-J. & Hirose, S. (2000). Three-Legged Walking for Fault Tolerant Locomotion of a 

Quadruped Robot with Demining Mission. 2000 IEEE/RSJ International 

Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS 2000), Vol. 2, 31 Oct.-5 Nov. 

2000 pp. 973 - 978. 
McGhee R.B. and Iswandhi G. I. (1979). Adaptive Locomotion of a Multilegged Robot over 

Rough Terrain. IEEE Tractions on system, man, and cybernetics, Vol., SMC-9, No. 

4, April 1979, pp. 176-182. 
Ota Y.; Inagaki Y. & et al. (1998). Research on a Six-Legged Walking Robot with Parallel 

Mechanism. Proceedings of the 1998 IEE WRSJ Intl. Conference on Intelligent 

Robots and Systems, Victoria, B.C., Canada (Oct. 1998), pp. 241-248. 
Pal, P.K. & Jayaraian, K. (1990). A free gait for generalized motion. IEEE Transactions on 

robotics and automation, Vol. 6, No. 5, pp. 597-600(1990). 
Porta J.M. and Celaya E. (2004). Reactive free gait generation to follow arbitrary trajectories 

with a hexapod robot. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Vol. 47, pp. 187— 

201(2004). 
Preumont, A; Alexadre, P & Ghuys, D. (1991). Gait analysis and implementation of a six leg 

walking machine. 91 ICAR., Fifth International Conference on Advanced Robotics. 

Robots in Unstructured Environments', 19-22 June, vol. 2, pp. 941 - 945(1991). 
Saranli, U.; Buehler, M. & Koditschek D. (2001). RHex: A simple and highly mobile hexapod 

robot. International Journal of Robotics Research, v 20, n 7, July, 2001, pp. 616-631. 
Song, S. M. & Choi B.S. (1990). The Optimally Stable Ranges of 2n-Legged Wave Gaits, IEEE 

Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics — part b: Cybernetics, Vol. 20, No. 

4, July- August 1990, pp. 888-902. 
Song S.M. and Waldron K.J. (1989). Machines that Walk: the Adaptive Suspension Vehicle. 

MIT Press, Cambridge (1989). 
Su J. (2004). The Research of the Gait Planning and Control of the Multilegged Walking 

Robot. Master thesis (in Chinese). Huazhong University of Science & Technology, 

Wuhan 430074, P.R.China, Aprils, 2004. 

Locomotion analysis of hexapod robot 309 

Takahashi, Y. Arai,T., et al.(2000). Development of Multi-Limb Robot with Omnidirectional 

Manipulability and Mobility. Proceedings of the 2000 IEEE-RSJ International 

Conference on intelligent Robots and Systems, Vol. 3, 31 Oct.-5 Nov. 2000, pp.2012 

-2017. 
Tsujita, K.; Tsuchiya, K.; & Onat A. (2001). Adaptive gait pattern control of a quadruped 

locomotion robot. 2001 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots 

and Systems, Vol. 4, 29 Oct.-3 Nov. 2001 pp. 2318 - 2325. 
Wang X.-J. (2005). A Study of Locomotion and Force Planning for Multilegged Walking 

Robots. PHD thesis(in Chinese), Huazhong University of Science & Technology 

,Wuhan 430074, P.R. China, October, 2005, pp. 95-100. 
Wang, Z.-Y.; Ding, X.-L. & Rovetta A. (2007). Structure Design and Locomotion Analysis of a 

Novel Robot for Lunar Exploration. 12th IFToMM World Congress, Besancon 

(France), June 18-21, 2007. 
Wettergreen, D.; Thomas, H & Thorpe C.(1990). Planning strategies for the ambler walking 

robot, IEEE International Conference on Systems Engineering, pp.9-11 (Aug.1990). 
Yang,J.-M. & Kim J.-H. (1998). A Strategy of Optimal Fault Tolerant Gait for the Hexapod 

Robot in Crab Walking. IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 

Automation, Vol. 2, 16-20 May 1998 pp. 1695 - 1700. 
Yang,J.-M. & Kim J.-H. (1998). Fault tolerant locomotion of the hexapod robot. IEEE 

Transactions on System, Man and Cybernetics. vol. 28, no. 1, Feb. 1998, pp. 109-116. 
Yang,J.-M. & Kim J.-H. (1999). Optimal Fault Tolerant Gait Sequence of the Hexapod Robot 

with Overlapping Reachable Areas and Crab Walking. IEEE Transactions on 

System, Man and Cybernetics, Part A, Vol. 29, Issue 2, March 1999 pp.224 - 235. 
Yang,J.-M. & Kim J.-H. (2000). A Fault Tolerant Gait for a Hexapod Robot over Uneven 

Terrain. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics — part b: Cybernetics, 

vol. 30, no. 1, February 2000, pp. 172- 180. 
Yang,J.-M. (2003). Fault-Tolerant Gait Generation for Locked Joint Failures. IEEE 

International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Vol. 3, 5-8 Oct. 2003 

pp. 2237 - 2242. 
Yoneda K. and Suzuki K. (1997). Gait and Foot Trajectory Planning for Versatile Motions of 

a Six-Legged Robot. Journal of Robotic Systems, 14(2), pp. 121-133(1997). 
Zhang, C.-d & Song, S.-M. (1991). Turning gait of a quadrupedal walking machine, " IEEE 

International Conference on Robotics and Automation, Vol. 3, 9-11 April, 1991, pp. 

703 - 708. 

310 Climbing and Walking Robots 

19 

In situ self-reconfiguration of hexapod robot 
OSCAR using biologically inspired approaches 

Bojan Jakimovski and Erik Maehle 

Institute of Computer Engineering, University Liibeck 

Germany 

1. Introduction 

A highly desirable feature for next generation robots operating on terrestrial or 
extraterrestrial environment (Chien et al., 2006) is that they possess the property of 
sustainable autonomic systems enveloping the self-management and self-x characteristics 
such: self-reconfiguration, self-optimization, and self-healing. Responses taken 
automatically by a system without real-time human intervention are called autonomic 
responses (Sterritt et al., 2006; Lewandowski et al., 2006). The self-x properties will enable 
the robot to continue with its mission tasks even in the cases when the robot has some faults 
within the system. The robot shall be able to reconfigure itself and continue with its mission 
tasks. 

The autonomic concept was introduced with the IBM Manifesto for Autonomic Computing 
(IBM, 2001). This proposed several key elements important for the autonomic systems: self- 
configuration, self-healing, self-optimization, and self -protection which were inspired by the 
human body's autonomic nervous system. Complementary to the IBM's initiative, the 
Organic Computing initiative (DFG, 2004) on the other hand, proposes the means of 
achieving such self-x properties of the next generation of self-organizing embedded systems, 
inspired by information processing seen within the biological systems. 

Transferring such biologically inspired paradigms (Hinchey & Sterritt, 2007) into computing 
systems and robots will enable the systems to perform in a more robust, safe, and flexible 
way. In that context we have been researching towards practically applying biologically 
inspired methodologies and developing novel procedures for next generations of self- 
reconfiguring and joint leg walking robots. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In the second chapter we give an overview of 
our hexapod robot prototype OSCAR on which we have conducted the experiments. We 
also introduce our innovative and patent pending mechanism for in-situ walking robot leg 
amputation and for robot reconfiguration. 

In the third chapter we explain the biologically inspired fault detection method used for 
fault/ anomaly detection. In the fourth chapter we describe the swarm intelligence concept 
for robot reconfiguration, which is used to perform a stable spatial reconfiguration of the 
hexapod walking robot. We also present the results from real experiments on self- 

312 Climbing and Walking Robots 

reconfiguration performed on the experimental hexapod robot OSCAR using our robot leg 
amputation mechanism. 

2. Organic Self-Configuring and Adapting Robot - OSCAR and innovative 
robot leg amputation mechanism 

2.1 Self-Configuring and Adapting Robot - OSCAR and innovative robot leg 
amputation mechanism R-LEGAM 

In order to perform real demonstrations on self-reconfiguration of a walking robot, we have 
built up a new prototype in our series of experimental hexapod robots - named OSCAR - 
Organic Self-Configuring and Adapting Robot (El Sayed Auf et al., 2006) (Jakimovski et al., 
2006). The robot is constructed of a fiberglass framed body, six legs set up spatially in a 
circle with 60 degrees between each leg, three servos per leg, onboard control electronics, 
wireless camera, and additional sensors. The robot is shown in Fig. 1. 

Fig. 1. OSCAR (Organic Self-Configuring and Adapting Robot) 

2.2 Innovative robot leg amputation mechanism 

In the newly built hexapod robot prototype, we have introduced an innovative mechanism 
called Robot Leg Amputation Mechanism (R-LEGAM), which is performing on demand 
robot leg amputation. 

The mechanism is built out of electrical connectors which are used for providing the servos 
with power and also for the control signals for the bus on which the servos are connected. 
Additionally there are integrated springs in each amputation mechanism and those are used 
to eject the leg from the robot's body in the process of leg amputation. Every mechanism has 
an additional small servo that on demand moves small mechanical part that further releases 
the energy stored within the compressed springs and the robot's leg is ejected. 

In situ self-reconfiguration of hexapod robot OSCAR using biologically inspired approaches 

313 

This mechanism is used in cases for example when the robot experiences some problems in 

some of its legs and in such circumstances can amputate the malfunctioned legs. 

By this the robot does not have to carry on the malfunctioned legs during the rest of its 

mission. The advantages are that the weight is decreased, the energy from batteries is used 

effectively, and the operating range of the robot after performing the leg amputation is 

increased in comparison with having the robot still walking with the malfunctioned legs. On 

the other hand, the disadvantages are that the stability and the speed of the robot are 

decreasing with every amputated leg. 

The robot's leg with the integrated leg ejection mechanism attached to the robot's body is 

presented in the Fig. 2. 

Fig. 2. OSCAR's leg with integrated leg ejection mechanism attached to the robot's body 

When the robot's control architecture finds an anomaly within some leg, and it decides that 
the leg should be amputated, a signal is sent to the amputation mechanism which then 
detaches the leg from the robot's body. 
In Fig. 3 the robot's leg is represented - detached from the robot's body. 

Fig. 3. OSCAR's leg detached from the robot's body after the amputation is performed. 

314 Climbing and Walking Robots 

3. Robot anomaly detection using artificial immune system based approach - 
RADE 

Fault or anomaly detection is a scope of many projects, especially those related to reliable 
and safety-critical systems. For fault detection in general and for the domain of autonomous 
robots various approaches have been considered like: Time-Delay Neural Networks 
(TDNN) (Christensen et al, 2008), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) (Przystalka, 2006), 
particle filters (Verma & Simmons, 2006; Zhuo-hua et al, 2006). The mentioned approaches 
are mostly related to the procedure of synthesizing fault detection components based on the 
collected data in the training runs. After the fault detectors have been synthesized they are 
evaluated on fault scenarios in real time, or on the recorded data, and the fault positives or 
fault negatives are estimated. 

However, building a full failure model for robotic systems and generating fault detectors for 
every possible fault scenario that may occur is often an exhaustive process (Haldar & Sarkar, 
2006). To overcome this constraint the fault detection mechanism should possess self- 
adapting and learning properties, just like biological systems have. 

In order to make our fault detection more adaptive to the environment and the current 
behavior of the robot, we have considered using the Artificial Immune System (AIS) 
paradigm as metaphoric implementation of the natural immune system. 
Similar to the natural immune system, AIS also introduces a metric that allows the system to 
distinguish between self (correctly functioning system) and non-self (anomaly in the system) 
and also to memorize and detect specific patterns. Therefore main properties of AIS are: 
recognition, identification, adaptation, self-organization. It has been successfully applied for 
various domains: pattern recognition (Cao & Dasgupta, 2003), data mining (Nasraoui et al., 
2005), network security (Pagnoni & Visconti, 2005), robotics (Michelan & Von Zuben, 2002), 
(Singh & Nair, 2005), (Sathyanath & Sahin, 2002), (Neal et al, 2006), (Canham et al, 2003), 
and others. There exist several different approaches (De Castro & Timmis, 2002) for AIS. 
However, the most commonly found in literature are: negative selection (Forrest et al., 
1994), positive selection (Nino & Beltran, 2002), artificial immune networks (AIN) (Galeano 
et al, 2005) and clonal selection (De Castro & Von Zuben, 2002). 

Negative selection mechanism is based on the ability of the immune system to learn to 
categorize between non-self and self by providing tolerance for the self. The negative 
selection consists of generating a set of detectors and evaluation of those detectors. Only the 
detectors that detect non-self, but do not react to self are considered for further detection. 
The positive selection, on the other hand, generates, evaluates and enables those detectors 
that can detect only the non-self. The clonal selection within AIS is based on the 
proliferation mechanism where self, upon recognizing non-self, starts to proliferate by 
cloning itself and also memorizing the pattern of the non-self (immune memory), so it has 
better responsiveness for the next encounter with such a particular non-self pattern. 
For the detection of an anomaly within robot systems different immune system approaches 
have been considered, like inflammation (Sathyanath & Sahin, 2002), or usage of negative 
selection (Neal et al., 2006). For our RADE anomaly detection approach (Jakimovski & 
Maehle, 2008) we are using the clonal selection method in combination with fuzzy logic for 
representing the information within the AIS. 

Within our robot's control architecture ORCA (Organic Robot Control Architecture) 
introduced in (Brockmann et al., 2005) and represented in Fig. 4. RADE is situated in 
monitoring and reasoning units called OCUs (Organic Control Units). OCUs are responsible 

In situ self-reconfiguration of hexapod robot OSCAR using biologically inspired approaches 

315 

for permanently monitoring the health status of the system and for taking suitable 
counteractions like reconfigurations in case malfunctions are detected. BCUs (Basic Control 
Units) implement the fault-free behaviors of the robotic system. Depending on its 
implementation, within the robot's control model several BCUs as behavioral units, several 
OCUs and a number of sensors and actuators can be present. 

Fig. 4. ORCA (Organic Robot Control Architecture). 

RADE uses fuzzy logic for representing information because an exact recognition is not 
necessary for triggering of an anomaly response. It is also similar to the way the association 
is made within the immune system, where given a similar (but not necessarily identical) 
stimulus, the response can be initiated. In a practical implementation, this would mean for 
example: if the behavior is walking then the acceleration level should not be low. Or in 
monitoring the servo's motor status, this can be interpreted as: by normal walking, the 
servo's current should not be high. In RADE such generalized self / non-self situations can 
be defined by fuzzy rules which are part of self / non-self sets. The rules in the non-self set 
detect when there is some anomaly present within the system, and the rules in the self set 
detect when the situation is not characterised as anomalous. The rules of both sets have the 
following structure: 

IF X1&X2&. . .Xn THEN Anomaly is Y WITH weightjactor Z 

(1) 

The "Xl&X2&...Xn" in (1) represents the premise part which constitutes of monitored 
behaviours: walking, standing, etc.; and particular some characteristics like: current, 
acceleration, etc. The "Y" in (1) is the consequence part and can have two types of values: 
" anomaly is present" or "anomaly is absent". The weight factor "Z" represents the clonal 
proliferation within AIS, and is in a range from 0.0 to 1.0. The "Z" value in (1) will increase 
for some constant value (for example: 0.1) if the rule has "fired". In parallel to that the 

316 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

weights will decrease in all the rules belonging to the opposite set, just as the concentration 
of self/ non-self drops being influenced by an increased concentration of non-self/ self 
within the immune system. The firing level of each rule is therefore always adjusted, 
depending on the value of "Z". The weight factor "Z" has also another positive 
characteristic for the anomaly detection engine. Namely we want to reduce the factor of 
hand coded elements in RADE, and let the system dynamically adjusts itself to the current 
situation. 

For example, in case we have coded fuzzy rules without using weights, depending on the 
manually pre-designed fuzzy membership sets for the premise parts of the rules, the rules 
can have an optimal response for some situation and perhaps a not satisfying response for 
other unforeseen situations. In case the fuzzy rules have weights, this would introduce two 
new features: 

The premise parts of the rules do not require any additional handcrafting and 
expert designing for their fuzzy membership sets. Therefore they can have some 
automatically generated "standard" triangular fuzzy membership sets, normally 
distributed within a valid range for the observed variable. For example such fuzzy 
membership sets for monitored variable "Current" having values in the range 
from min to max 3 Amperes can be represented as: 

Fig. 5. Fuzzy membership set for monitored variable "Current". 

The other membership sets for other monitored variables (for example: 
acceleration) are going to have the same "standard" triangular fuzzy membership 
normally distributed for their input range. The nice thing for having such 
"standard" generated fuzzy membership sets is that they can be part of the 
learning process, which we plan to introduce in the next step of development of 
our anomaly detection engine. Having the "standard" fuzzy membership sets for 
each of the observed parameters, we may build up a rule-based learning system 
which incorporates only new situations since the fuzzy membership sets for the 
observed parameters are not going to be changed, and so it will be possible to 
distinguish between what has been already learned and what can be learned. 

The weight factors for such rules having the "standard" generated fuzzy 
membership sets allow the rule to adapt to the situation even without the rule 
being optimally pre-designed at start, i.e. having its membership sets optimally 

In situ self-reconfiguration of hexapod robot OSCAR using biologically inspired approaches 

317 

pre-designed. Therefore the changes of the weights depend on the particular 
situation and therefore contribute for the dynamics of overall system. 

The previously discussed self and non-self rule sets and the dynamical change of their 
weights can be visually represented as in Figure 6. 

Situation 

Behavior: Walking 
Current: VeryHigh 

NON-SELF SET 

IF 

THEN 

WEIGHT 

IF 

Behavior is Walking AND Current is 
Very_High 

THEN 

Anomaly is PRESENT 

0.3 

♦ 

IF 

Behavior is Walking AND Current is 
High 

THEN 

Anomaly is PRESENT 

0.5 

IF 

THEN 

Anomaly 1$ PRESENT 

SELF SET 

IF 

THEN 

WEIGHT 

IF 

Behavior is Walking AND Current is 
Medium 

THEN 

Anomaly is ABSENT 

0.4 

* 

IF 

Behavior is Walking AND Current is 
Small 

THEN 

Anomaly is ABSENT 

0.6 

* 

IF 

THEN 

Anomaly is ABSENT 

♦ 

Fig. 6. Functioning principle of RADE and the dynamically changing weights within the self 
and non-self rule sets (for clearness, here only monitoring parameter "Current" is 
represented, although additional monitored parameter, like " Acceleration'' can be 
considered as well). 

As illustrated in the figure, when the premise within a rule belonging to the non-self set is 
satisfied, the rule "fires'' and its weight is also increased by some constant value, e.g. by 0.1 
from 0.3 to 0.4. At the same time, the weights of rules belonging to another set are decreased 
with the same constant value of 0.1. In such a way they lower their value from 0.4 on 0.3 or 
from 0.6 on 0.5 and so on. 

In every computation step, a weighted output is calculated from such a fuzzy system which 
contains two membership functions: self and non-self. The value is in the range from 0.0 (no 
anomaly) to 1.0 (full anomaly) and represents the output of the RADE method. The output 
of RADE is computed in a defuzzification process as a centroid of fuzzy outputs of the 
"fired" rules. Therefore the output of RADE is influenced by the weight factor of each of the 
firing rules. The weight factor acts in the similar way as the secondary and subsequent 
responses within the immune system, i.e. the more the weight is associated to some rules, 
the more significant will be the response of those rules to the output of RADE in the next 
moment of their firing. 

The change of weights therefore acts as some sort of short memory for events that occurred 
some moments ago. The anomaly output level of RADE depends on its short history and 

318 Climbing and Walking Robots 

also on actual system's state. Thus, the anomaly detection method RADE autonomously 
adapts to the situation and generates an appropriate health signal. 

Within our experiments RADE method is used to detect a potential anomaly situation 
within the robot's system and robot's legs and to initiate a leg amputation and robot self- 
reconfiguration. 

4 Self Reconfiguration of a joint-leg hexapod robot 

4.1 Swarm Intelligence for Robot Reconfiguration (S.I.R.R.) method 

Different approaches have been tried for overcoming the robot's malfunctioning. One of 
them is swarm robotics. Swarm robotics is a synonym for decentralized autonomous 
systems built out of many robots which communicate and cooperate with one another in 
order to accomplish some mission tasks. Due to the high number of entities in such swarm 
system, swarm robots have a high potential for fault tolerance. Namely, the failure within 
one or several robots may not compromise the overall system's functionality. (Winfield, 
2006) (Hyun Yool et al, 2006) . 

However, we can also shift the macro view and consider that the robots themselves can be 
built out of several autonomous entities, where the failure of one or several such entities will 
not make the robot completely malfunctioned. Modular robots (Xuan et al., 2006) (Hancher 
& Hornby, 2006) are such an approach, where the robot is built out of many identical 
functional parts which when combined together and coordinated in the proper way can 
function like a robust robot. However, it is a still ongoing research on how those separately 
functional elements can be combined together and coordinated autonomously to function 
like one robot. 

In our project, we have taken yet another direction with different types of granularity of the 
system. Namely for our walking hexapod robot, we have assumed that the robot legs 
themselves act like own entities. So we have considered that one robot leg is a functional 
entity built of several servos which cannot be considered as independent functional units, 
but only when combined together in one robot leg segment. 

Therefore, when taking into account this type of granularity view, we have six legs acting 
like six independent entities which can be considered further for reconfiguration purposes. 
Another part of the research is based on an idea on how to perform the reconfiguration on 
such functional entities within one hexapod robot with changeable morphology. The 
approach which we developed is based on the natural phenomena of flocks of birds and 
schools of fish and is named S.I.R.R. (Swarm Intelligence for Robot Reconfiguration) 
(Jakimovski et al., 2008). The flocking phenomenon was researched by Craig Reynolds who 
introduced boids as a distributed behavior model to simulate coordinated movements of the 
flocking of birds (Reynolds, 1987). Each member of a boid implements three rules and 
interacts only with its neighboring boid members. 

These rules are defined as: 

1. Separation rule: the member tries to avoid the crowding with other local boids; 

2. Alignment rule: the member moves towards the average heading of the local boids; 

3. Cohesion rule: the member moves towards the local average position of the other local 
boids. 

In situ self-reconfiguration of hexapod robot OSCAR using biologically inspired approaches 

319 

In our experiments we have defined that each robot's leg represents one member of boid 
and since the robot has intrinsic symmetry with three legs on one side and three on another, 
the legs can be considered as members of two groups of boids - see Fig. 7 (a). Additionally 
for performing proper spatial robot reconfiguration we have considered that each boid 
besides the three above mentioned rules implements an additional two boid rules: 

4. Boids are allowed to have n, n+1, or n-1 number of participants in their boid in 
comparison to the other boid, where n is the number of entities (legs) in the boid. In 
case there are n+2 more members in one boid in comparison to another one, the 
legs which belong to the "overcrowded" boid and that are situated on the edge of 
the boid, i.e. they have just one other neighbor member in the boid, will be moved 
to another boid until the "overcrowded" boid's size becomes n+1. 

5. Members (legs) of one boid that join the other boid change their swinging and 
stance end-position parameters with respect to the parameters characteristic for 
that boid. 

The fifth rule is used for example when boid (leg) changes from one to the other side of the 

robot's symmetry line. 

In Fig. 7 we represent the usage of the above five boid rules used for a potential robot 

reconfiguration. 

(a) 

(b) 

X 

(C) (d) 

Fig. 7. Illustration of reconfiguration of a robot using the five boid rules within S.I.R.R. 
(Swarm Intelligence for Robot Reconfiguration) algorithm; (a) legs of the robot forming two 
boids; (b) two legs of the robot have malfunctioned; (c) member (leg) from "crowded" boid 
joins another less "crowded" boid; (d) situation after reconfiguration. The dotted line 
represents the robot's line of symmetry. 

Fig. 7 (a) is the initial robot configuration with legs belonging to two boids. Fig. 7 (b) shows 
the situation when two legs have malfunctioned. Fig. 7 (c) shows that after the two legs have 
malfunctioned the number of members in the right boid does not equal the number of 

320 Climbing and Walking Robots 

members in the left boid. This matches the fourth rule used in our SIRR algorithm and 
therefore a member from the right boid transfers to the left boid and therefore 
reconfiguration is performed. Fig. 7 (d) shows the situation after the reconfiguration. 
In Fig. 7 (d), we can also see that the robot's line of symmetry changes. This change of 
robot's symmetry line occurs in emergent way due to the reconfiguration of members in 
boids that takes place. 

After the reconfiguration is performed using the SIRR approach, the robot has a more stable 
spatial configuration of its legs, since the angles and distance between the legs are more 
equally distributed. Such configurations enable the robot to have better static and dynamic 
weight distribution during walking. 

In (Jakimovski et al., 2008) we have introduced and explained the Swarm Intelligence for 
Robot Reconfiguration approach in more detail. 

4.2 Simulation - demonstration of self-reconfiguration of hexapod robot OSCAR 

In order to validate the practical applicability of the S.I.R.R. approach, we have conducted 
an initial simulation test scenario. The test scenario considers several robot spatial leg 
posture reconfigurations, after some legs of the robot have been declared as malfunctioned. 
For each test scenario, we start with a fully functional configuration of the robot. 
The leg numbering of the robot OSCAR is as following (Fig. 8): 

% 

v/ 

3 2 
J5 0. 

/\ 

Fig. 8. Model of hexapod robot OSCAR with leg numbering. The arrow is showing the front 
direction of the robot. 

We then assume that some randomly chosen legs have malfunctioned, and the 
reconfiguration of the robot is performed. 
The scenario can be described as follows: 

1. leg has malfunctioned; reconfiguration; 

2. leg 2 has malfunctioned; reconfiguration; 

3. leg 3 has malfunctioned; reconfiguration; 

4. leg 4 has malfunctioned; reconfiguration. 

When a leg has malfunctioned, we assume that the leg is centered and it is lifted up. Then 
the reconfiguration takes place. 

In situ self-reconfiguration of hexapod robot OSCAR using biologically inspired approaches 

321 

%|fb** MiSM* mM^ 

Fig. 8. Test scenario - reconfiguration of a robot using the S.LR.R. approach; (a) Top model 
view of fully functional hexapod robot; (b) leg number has malfunctioned; (c) after S.LR.R. 
reconfiguration; (d) leg number 2 has malfunctioned; (e) S.LR.R. reconfiguration with 
change of symmetry axis; (f) after S.LR.R. reconfiguration; (g) leg number 3 has 
malfunctioned; (h) S.LR.R. reconfiguration with a change of symmetry axis; (i) after S.LR.R. 
reconfiguration; (j) leg number 4 has malfunctioned; (k) after S.LR.R. reconfiguration; the 
dotted line represents the robot's line of symmetry. 

The results of the simulated reconfiguration including the intermediate steps are 
represented in Fig. 8. The test scenario starts with a fully functional hexapod robot, Fig. 8(a). 
Then the leg of the robot malfunctions, Fig. 8(b). After this, the S.LR.R. reconfiguration 
goes into action and the spatial reconfiguration of the robot's legs is performed. Fig. 8(c) 
represents the robot's spatial configuration of the legs after the S.LR.R. reconfiguration was 
done. After this, leg number 2 malfunctions, Fig. 8(d) S.LR.R. reconfiguration is performed, 
and the direction of the axis of symmetry of the robot is adjusted, Fig. 8(e). The result of 
S.LR.R. reconfiguration and new spatial arrangement of the legs is represented in Fig. 8(f). In 
Fig. 8(g), leg number 3 malfunctions; S.LR.R. reconfiguration is performed, and the direction 
of the axis of symmetry of the robot is adjusted, Fig. 8(h). Reconfigured robot using S.LR.R. 
is shown in Fig. 8(i). In Fig. 8(j), the robot's leg number 4 malfunctions. The final result after 
robot reconfiguration using S.LR.R. is shown in Fig. 8(k). Although the algorithm has 
correctly distributed the legs, however the robot's stability is drastically impaired due to the 
only two legs configuration. 

322 Climbing and Walking Robots 

In comparison with the previous reconfiguration experiment of the robot, the results from 
the reconfiguration experiment using the S.I.R.R. approach show a better spatial 
reconfiguration of the robot's legs, in the sense of acquiring stability for the robot when a leg 
has malfunctioned, and in that way, enabling the robot to continue with its mission tasks, 
even in cases when it has mechanical failures in its legs. 

4.3 Real case demonstration of self-reconfiguration of hexapod robot OSCAR 

Initial positive simulation experimental results done with the SIRR method have motivated 
us to proceed with additional real robot experiments in which the goal is to perform in-situ 
real time hexapod robot reconfiguration with leg amputations and enable the hexapod robot 
to continue with its mission despite the malfunctioned legs. For achieving this requirement 
we have used the already introduced innovative robot leg amputation mechanism which 
enables the robot on demand to amputate the malfunctioned leg. When the monitoring unit 
in the robot's architecture detects that there is an anomaly present within the leg, it sends a 
control signal to ejection mechanism located on the robot's leg to initiate a leg ejection, i.e. to 
amputate the malfunctioning leg and then after to reconfigure the spatial positioning of the 
robots legs to 

We have conducted the following demonstration scenario and simulation of leg defects: 

1. First leg numbered 3 becomes malfunctioned and the robot performs SIRR 
reconfiguration; 

2. Second leg number 1 becomes malfunctioned and the robot performs SIRR 
reconfiguration; 

3. Third leg numbered 5 becomes malfunctioned and the robot performs SIRR 
reconfiguration; 

This is represented in Fig. 9 (a) - (1). 

As can be seen in the Fig. 9 (a), the robot starts with the initial six leg configuration. In the 

first fault case, leg number 3 becomes malfunctioned and the robot control architecture 

sends a signal to the leg amputation mechanism to amputate the leg number 3. This is 

shown in Fig. 9 (b) 

After that the robot performs self-reconfiguration using the SIRR approach - Fig. 9 (c) and 

continues with its mission. 

In the second fault case, leg number 1 becomes malfunctioned - Fig. 9 (d) and gets 

amputated - Fig. 9 (e) After that the robot performs self-reconfiguration - Fig. 9 (f) and 

continues with walking. In Fig. 9 (g) the third leg, number 5 becomes malfunctioned and 

gets amputated - Fig. 9 (h). After that the robot performs self -reconfiguration using the SIRR 

approach - Fig. 9 (i) and continues with walking - Fig. 9 (j) - (1). 

In situ self-reconfiguration of hexapod robot OSCAR using biologically inspired approaches 

323 

Fig. 9. Runtime reconfiguration of a hexapod robot OSCAR from 6 to 3 legs: (a) normal six 
legged configuration; (b) leg number 3 is malfunctioned and gets amputated; (c) robot 
performs reconfiguration using the SIRR approach and continues with walking; (d) leg 
number 1 becomes malfunctioned; (e) leg number 1 gets amputated; (f) robot performs 
reconfiguration using the SIRR approach and continues with walking; (g) leg number 5 
becomes malfunctioned; (h) leg number 5 gets amputated; (i) robot performs 
reconfiguration using the SIRR approach and continues with walking; (j)-(l) robot OSCAR 
continues with its mission despite the loss of 3 legs. 

We have made an analysis chart representing the ground contacts of legs by normal walking 
and by walking with leg amputations and robot self-reconfiguration. The results of these 
analyses can be seen in Fig. 10, Fig. 11. 

324 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Normal walking - ground contact 

o> 

4 

c 

CD 

3 

-Q 

E 

? 

3 

C 

O) 

1 

CD 

^H ^^^^H ^^M ^^^^H ^^^H ^^^H M^^M 

9 25 41 57 73 89 105 121137 153 169 185 201217 233 249 265 281297 313 329 345 361377 393 409 425 441 
1 17 33 49 65 81 97 113 129145 161177 193 209 225 241257 273 289 305 321337 353 369 385 401417 433 449 

Time slots (5ms) 
■ Leg ♦ Leg 1 v Leg 2 a Leg 3 ► Leg 4 < Leg 5 

Fig. 10. Ground contacts of the robot's feet during normal walking of the hexapod robot 

Walking with leg amputations - ground contact 

3- 

.Q 

| 2 , 

c 

O) 1 

o 

_l 

0i 
-1 

33 93 153 213 273 333 393 453 513 573 633 693 753 813 873 933 993 1053111311731233 1293 
3 63 123 183 243 303 363 423 483 543 603 663 723 783 843 903 963 1023 10831143120312631323 

Time slots (5ms) 
■ Leg ♦ Leg 1 Leg 2 a Leg 3 ► Leg 4 < Leg 5 

Fig. 11. Ground contacts of the robot's feet by walking of hexapod robot with leg 
amputations and self -reconfiguration 

The robot in these experiments is walking with a biologically inspired emergent gait, which 
means that the gait is not // hard-wired ,/ or by any means predefined. A simple rule is used 
which allows a leg to swing only if its two neighboring legs are on the ground (El Sayed Auf 
et al., 2006). By this, the gait pattern emerges from the local swing and stance phases of the 
robot's legs // joining ,/ the 'Tegs boid" at the particular robot's side after the reconfiguration 
has been performed. In Fig. 10 the chart represents the leg ground contacts for normal 

In situ self-reconfiguration of hexapod robot OSCAR using biologically inspired approaches 325 

walking - fully functional robot. In Fig. 11 the chart represents the leg ground contacts of the 
robot walking with leg amputations where we can see how the legs get amputated during 
the experiment, the leg ground contacts are lost and the robot still continues with walking. 
Leg number 3 gets amputated at time slot 335; Leg number 1 gets amputated at time slot 
785; Leg number 5 gets amputated at time slot 1140. The swing phases are drastically 
shortened with each reconfiguration and after the time slot 1140 the robot still continues to 
walk although with very shortened swing phases comparing to relatively longer stance 
phases. 

Additional measurements have been done on tracking the robot's heading while performing 
leg amputations and robot reconfigurations. With these measurements we wanted to test the 
straight walking and heading of the robot while it is performing leg amputations in different 
order of leg ejections and its influence on robot's walking. 

The solid line in figures: Fig. 12. (a, b); Fig. 13 (a, b); Fig. 14 (a, b) represents the track of the 
robot during its walking. The arrow lines represent the heading of the robot. The initial 
heading angle is 270°. 

Experiment 1: 

Fig. 12. (a) OSCAR performing leg amputations during its walking in the following 
order: 0, 1, 2 (in Fig. 12. a, from left to right and from up to down). 

Fig. 12. (b) Tracking of the robot's heading while the robot is amputating the legs 
during its walking in the following order: 0, 1, 2 . The solid line represents the track 
of the robot during its walking. The arrow lines represent the heading of the robot 
during its walking. 

Experiment 2: 

Fig. 13. (a) OSCAR performing leg amputations during its walking in the following 
order: 0, 2, 4 (in Fig. 13. a, from left to right and from up to down). 

Fig. 13. (b) Tracking of the robot's heading while the robot is amputating the legs 
during its walking in the following order: 0, 2, 4 . The solid line represents the track 
of the robot during its walking. The arrow lines represent the heading of the robot 
during its walking. 

Experiment 3: 

Fig. 14. (a) OSCAR performing leg amputations during its walking in the following 
order: 5, 1, 2 (in Fig. 14. a, from left to right and from up to down). 

Fig. 14. (b) Tracking of the robot's heading while the robot is amputating the legs 
during its walking in the following order: 5, 1, 2 . The solid line represents the track 
of the robot during its walking. The arrow lines represent the heading of the robot 
during its walking. 

326 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 12. (a). OSCAR performing leg amputations in the following order: fully functional, leg 
amputated, leg 1 amputated, leg 2 amputated - from left to right and from up to down. 

Fig. 12. (b) Tracking of robot's heading while the robot is ejecting the legs during its walking 
in the following order: 0, 1, 2. 

In situ self-reconfiguration of hexapod robot OSCAR using biologically inspired approaches 

327 

Fig. 13. (a) OSCAR performing leg amputations in the following order: fully functional, leg 
amputated, leg 2 amputated, leg 4 amputated - from left to right and from up to down. 

Fig. 13. (b) Tracking of robot's heading while the robot is ejecting the legs during its walking 
in the following order: 0, 2, 4. 

328 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 14. (a) OSCAR performing leg amputations in the following order: fully functional, leg 5 
amputated, leg 1 amputated, leg 2 amputated - from left to right and from up to down. 

Fig. 14. (b) Tracking of robot's heading while the robot is ejecting the legs during its walking 
in the following order: 5, 1, 2. 

In situ self-reconfiguration of hexapod robot OSCAR using biologically inspired approaches 329 

On one hand it is "nice to have" a robotic system that exhibits emergent walking. However 
on the other hand, this kind of pure emergent walking has perhaps negative influence on 
how the robot is walking straight and its keeping the heading. 

Despite this fact, we still wanted to measure how the robot deviates from the straight path 
(keeping the course to 270°) while performing the leg amputations and walking with 
emergent gait. The results show that even when the robot has malfunctions within its legs 
and performs legs amputations, it is still more or less capable to walk straight with slight 
turning in some cases (Fig.13). Although this deviation from course is present, we must take 
in account also that the robot has amputated legs and that the deviation is perhaps still not 
that radical - like for example: robot walking in circles immediately, or similar. 
One additional idea that might be used to avoid or minimize such deviation from the main 
course is to couple the emergent behavior with some other behaviors like going right or left, 
which in that case will somehow intervene with the emergent walking gait in order to keep 
the robot on its course. This will be as extension to the research done on curve walking with 
robot OSCAR (El Sayed Auf et al., 2007). This idea will be analyzed further in future 
experiments done on self -reconfiguring walking robots. 

5. Conclusion 

In this section we have elaborated on biologically inspired methods and experiments done 
for real case hexapod robot self-reconfiguration. We have introduced a patent pending 
mechanism used for leg amputation by joint-leg walking robots which is practically used for 
reconfiguration cases by our hexapod robot OSCAR. Further, we have explained the 
artificial immune system based approach - RADE, used for monitoring the robot's health 
status and leg anomaly detection in joint-leg walking robot. 

We have also introduced and explained the biologically inspired Swarm Intelligence for 
Robot Reconfiguration (S.I.R.R.) method which is used for performing in-situ robot self- 
reconfiguration. The S.I.R.R method is used for spatial distributing of the robot's legs when 
a reconfiguration is performed. So, the robot achieves a stable spatial configuration even 
when one or more legs are malfunctioned and get amputated from the robot's body. 
Through experimental cases we have demonstrated how the hexapod robot OSCAR - 
despite the anomalies that occur within its legs - manages to amputate the malfunctioned 
legs, self-reconfigures and continues with walking. In these experiments also tracking 
measurements were done on tracking the robot's heading while it is performing leg 
amputations and self- reconfigurations. 

The presented results from experiments on self-reconfiguration look promising, and 
therefore future work will consider an additional research on integrating self- 
reconfiguration with the walking robot's high-level behaviors aiming to improve the robot's 
heading after some reconfiguration is preformed. Additional work will be also done on 
improving the robustness and generic usefulness of the presented self-reconfiguration 
approach and its potential application for other types of robots. 

6. Acknowledgment 

This work is partly supported by German Research Foundation - DFG (associated to SPP 
1183, MA 1412/8-1). 

330 Climbing and Walking Robots 

7. References 

Brockmann W.; Maehle E. & Mosch F. (2005). Organic Fault-Tolerant Control Architecture 

for Robotic Applications. 4th IARP/IEEE-RAS/EURON Workshop on Dependable 

Robots in Human Environments, Nagoya, Japan. 
Canham R.; Jackson A. H. & Tyrrell A. (2003) Robot Error Detection Using an Artificial 

Immune System, Proceedings of the 2003 NASA/DoD Conference on Evolvable 

Hardware, 2003. 
Cao Y. & Dasgupta D. (2003). An Immunogenetic Approach in Chemical Spectrum 

Recognition. Edited volume Advances in Evolutionary Computing (Ghosh & Tsutsui, 

eds .), Springer- Verlag. 
Chien, S.; Doyle, R.; Davies, A.; Jonsson, A. & Lorenz, R. (2006), The Future of AI in Space, 

IEEE Intelligent Systems, pp. 64-69. 
Christensen, A.L.; O'Grady, R.; Birattari, M. & Dorigo, M. (2008). Fault detection in 

autonomous robots based on fault injection and learning, Journal Autonomous 

Robots, Vol. 24, No. 1 (January, 2008), pp. 49-67. 
De Castro L. N. & Timmis J. (2002). Artificial Immune Systems: A New Computational 

Intelligence Approach. Springer-Verlag, pp. 36-46. 
De Castro, L.N. & Von Zuben, F.J. (2002). Learning and Optimization using the clonal 

selection principle, IEEE Transaction on Evolutionary Computation, pp. 239-251. 
El Sayed Auf A.; Larionova S.; Litza M.; Mosch F.; Jakimovski B. & Maehle E. (2007). Ein 

Organic Computing Ansatz zur Steuerung einer sechsbeinigen Laufmaschine. 

Autonome Mobile Systeme 2007, pp. 233-239. 
El Sayed Auf, A.; Mosch, F. & Litza, M. (2006). How the six-legged walking machine OSCAR 

handles leg amputations, In Workshop on Bio-inspired Cooperative and Adaptive 

Behaviours in Robots, pp. 115-124, Rome, Italy. 
Forrest S.; Perelson A. S.; Allen L. & Cherukuri R. (1994). Self-Nonself Discrimination in a 

Computer, In Proceedings of the 1994 IEEE Symposium on Research in Security and 

Privacy, Los Alamitos, CA. 
Galeano J.C.; Veloza-Suan A. & Gonzalez F.A. (2005) A comparative analysis of artificial 

immune network models, Proceedings of the Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary 

Computation, pp. 361-368, Washington DC, USA. 
German Science Foundation (DFG) Priority Program SPP 1183 "Organic Computing", 

(http://www.organic-computing.de/spp), 2004. 
Haldar, B. & Sarkar, N. (2006). Robust fault detection and isolation in mobile robot, 

Proceedings of IF AC, Beijing, China. 
Hancher, M. D. & Hornby, G. S. (2006). A Modular Robotic System with Applications to 

Space Exploration, 2nd IEEE International Conference on Space Mission Challenges for 

Information Technology (SMC-IT06), pp. 125-132. 
Hinchey, M. G. & Sterritt, R. (2007). 99% (Biological) Inspiration...., Fourth IEEE International 

Workshop on Engineering of Autonomic and Autonomous Systems (EASe x 07), pp. 187- 

190. 
Hyun Yool, K.; Lee, Y.; Choi', H.; Hyun Yool, B. & Hwan Kim, D. (2006). Swarm Robotics: 

Self Assembly, Physical Configuration, and Its Control, SICE-ICASE International 

Joint Conference, pp. 4276-4279. 
IBM Research: Autonomic Computing, (http://www.ibm.com/research/autonomic), pp. 

21-30. 

In situ self-reconfiguration of hexapod robot OSCAR using biologically inspired approaches 331 

Jakimovski, B.; Litza, M; Mosch, F. & El Sayed Auf, A. (2006). Development of an organic 

computing architecture for robot control, In Informatik 2006 Workshop on Organic 

Computing - Status and Outlook, pp. 145-152, Dresden. 
Jakimovski, B.; Meyer B. & Maehle, E. (2008). Swarm Intelligence for Self-Reconfiguring 

Walking Robot, IEEE Swarm Intelligence Symposium, St. Louis, Missouri, USA, Sep. 

21-23,2008. 
Jakimovski, B. & Maehle, E. (2008). Artificial Immune System Based Robot Anomaly 

Detection Engine for Fault Tolerant Robots, 5th International Conference on 

Autonomic and Trusted Computing (ATC-08), pp. 177-190, Oslo, Norway. 
Lewandowski, S.M.; Van Hook, D.J.; O'Leary, G.C.; Haines, J.W. & Rossey, L.M. (2001), 

SARA: Survivable Autonomic Response Architecture, In Proc. DARPA Information 

Survivability Conference and Exposition II, Vol. 1, pp. 77-88. 
Michelan R. & Von Zuben F.J. (2002). Decentralized control system for autonomous 

navigation based on an evolved artificial immune network, Proceedings of the 2002 

Congress on Evolutionary Computation, Vol. 2., pp. 1021-1026. 
Nasraoui O.; Cardona C; & Rojas C. (2005). Using retrieval measures to asses similarity in 

mining dynamic web clickstreams, Proceeding of the eleventh ACM SIGKDD 

International Conference on Knowledge Discovery in Data Mining KDD, 2005. 
Neal M.; Feyereisl J.; Rascuna R. & Wang X. (2006). Touch Me, I'm Fine: Robot Autonomy 

Using an Artificial Innate Immune System, 5th International Conference on Artificial 

Immune Systems, Oeiras, Portugal. 
Nino F. & Beltran O. (2002). A change detection software agent based on immune mixed 

selection, Evolutionary Computation, CEC '02. Proceedings of the 2002 Congress on, 

Vol. 1, pp. 693-698. 
Pagnoni A. & Visconti A. (2005). An innate immune system for the protection of computer 

networks. Proceedings of the 4 th international symposium on information and 

communication technologies, Vol.92, pp. 63-68. 
Przystalka, P. (2006). Model-Based Fault Detection and Isolation Using Locally Recurrent 

Neural Networks, Lecture Notes In Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 5097, pp. 123 - 134. 
Reynolds, C. (1987) Flocks, herds, and schools: A distributed behavioral model, Comp. Graph, 

Vol 21, No. 4, 1987, pp. 25-34. 
Sathyanath S. & Sahin F.(2002). AISIMAM - An Artificial Immune System Based Intelligent 

Multi Agent Model and its Application to a Mine Detection Problem, 1 st 

International Conference on Artificial Immune Systems, Canterbury, UK. 
Singh C.T. & Nair S.B. (2005). An Artificial Immune System for a MultiAgent Robotics 

System, Transactions of Engineering, Computing and Technology, Vol.6, pp. 308-311. 
Sterritt, R.; Hinchey, M.; Rouff, C; Rash, J. & Truszkowski, W. (2006), Sustainable and 

Autonomic Space Exploration Missions, 2nd IEEE International Conference on Space 

Mission Challenges for Information Technology (SMC-IV06), pp. 59-66. 
Verma, V. & Simmons, R. (2006). Scalable robot fault detection and identification, Robotics 

and Autonomous Systems, Vol. 54, No. 2, pp. 184-191. 
Winfield, A.F.T. (2006). Safety in numbers: fault-tolerance in robot swarms, International 

Journal of Modelling, Identification and Control, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 30-37. 
Xuan, L.; Minglu, Z. & Wei, L. (2008). Methods to Modular Robot Design, Second 

International Symposium on Intelligent Information Technology Application, pp. 663-668. 

332 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Zhuo-hua, D.; Ming, F.; Zi-xing, C. & Jin-xia, Y. (2006). An adaptive particle filter for mobile 
robot fault diagnosis, Journal of Central South University of Technology, Vol. 13, No. 6 
(December, 2006), pp. 689-693. 

20 

Softly Stable Walk Using Phased Compliance 

Control with Virtual Force for 
Multi-Legged Walking Robot 

Qingjiu Huang 

Tokyo Institute of Technology 
Japan 

1. Introduction 

Recently, although the researches on the terrain adaptability of multi-legged walking robot 
have been widely performed (D. Wettergreen & C. Thorpe, 1996; T. Kubota, et al., 2000; 
Q. Huang, et al, 2000; Q. Huang & K. Nonami, 2000; Q. Huang & K. Nonami, 2003; K. 
Nonami & Q. Huang, 2003), it has not been put to be more widely practical use. This is 
because there are still some problems in the stable walking of multi-legged robot that need 
to be solved. For example, when the swing legs of robot moves, because the COG, 
supported weight, and moment of inertia of body change dynamically, the posture of robot 
body becomes unstable; furthermore, with the switch between the swing leg and the 
support leg, there occur the collisions and slippage between the foot and the ground. 
Because of the above uncertain disturbances, the tiny vibrations occur when the robot is 
walking. Until now, we proposed a robust control of posture and vibration based on a 
virtual suspension model for multi-legged walking robot to decrease the tiny vibrations 
when the robot walks (Q. Huang, et al., 2004; Q. Huang, et al., 2007). However, how to 
decrease the impact force between the foot and the terrain has not been solved yet. When 
the robot walks on irregular terrain or it bumps against the obstacle, due to the influence 
from the impact force between the foot and the ground, it is a possibility that the mechanical 
parts of robot are destroyed; moreover, the vibration in the robot body occurs and arouses 
the instability of posture. Therefore, it is necessary to decrease the impact force for the 
walking of the multi-legged robot. 

Compliance control is one of the most effective control methods for the hand of manipulator 
to reduce impact force of contacting work (J. Huang, et al., 2002), because it can control 
relationship between the contact force and displacement of the hand. Recently, the 
compliance control was applied to biped walking robot (R. Quint, 1998). However, until 
now the compliance control is performed for decrease the vibration after impact force is 
generated, such as after the foot of the robot collides with the ground. It is impossible to 
reduce impact force perfectly as long as the compliance control is used after impact force is 
generated. So, counter measure which used the visual sensor to avoid object was proposed 
for manipulator in order to more effectively reduce the impact force (V. Mut, et al., 1998; 
X. Chen & H. Kano, 2005). And avoid action method that used virtual force to decelerate the 

334 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

motion speed of hand was proposed (T. Tsuji, et aL, 1997). However, these methods don't be 
applied to the legged walking robot, the problem on the impact force between the foot and 
the terrain when the foot lifting and landing aren't solved yet. Moreover, the robot motion 
can only move uniformity using the current compliance control method because it always 
keeps constant stiffness gain and viscous gain. Therefore, the current compliance control 
method can realize the target motion, but it is hard to decrease impact force for multi-legged 
walking robot. 

In this chapter, in order to realize the softly stable walk of multi-legged robot, we introduce 
a phased compliance control with virtual compliance force to reduce impact force between 
the foot and unexpected ground and obstacle (Q. Huang, et aL, 2008). Moreover, we show a 
design of hierarchical control system for multi-legged walking robot, which is combined the 
proposed phased compliance control with a posture and vibration control based on a virtual 
suspension model, to realize the stable walking on unknown rough terrain. Finally, the 
effectiveness of the above introduced method is discussed using the walking experimental 
results of the developed six-legged walking robot. 

2. A Six-Legged Walking Robot 

Fig. 1. The developed six-legged walking robot 

Figure 1 shows our six-legged walking robot. The driving mechanism for each leg is a 
hybrid type mechanism composing a DC motor and a harmonic slowdown device through a 
rubber belt. Some accessories, such as computers, sensors, motor drive drivers and one AC 
power supply are mounted on the body of robot. 

Figure 2 shows the schematic diagram of the robot with the detail measurements of its body. 
As shown, this robot is designed with three joints in each leg. By controlling the output 
torque of the motor for driving these three joints, the walking gait can be designed freely. 
Q\~ 03 in Fig.l show the rotation angles of the three joints, and each of them has a range of - 
90deg~ 270deg. This flexibility in foot is advantage for robot to walk on the irregular terrain. 
Each parameter encompassing the weight of each part of robot and the selected rated torque 
of the motor are shown in Table 1. 

Softly Stable Walk Using Phased Compliance 

Control with Virtual Force for Multi-Legged Walking Robot 

335 

Leg 6 

Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of the robot 

Total weight [kg] 

51.0 

Loadable weight [kg] 

40.0 

Reduction ratio of harmonic drive f5\ 

80 

Reduction ratio of harmonic drive fti 

120 

Reduction ratio of harmonic drive p^ 

80 

Reduction ratio of timing belt y-± 

2.0 

Reduction ratio of timing belt y-± 

4.0 

Reduction ratio of timing belt y-y 

4.2 

Rated torque of DC motor z r \ [Nm] 

0.14 

Rated torque of DC motor r r 2 [Nm] 

0.20 

Rated torque of DC motor T r ^ [Nm] 

0.14 

Table 1. Specifications of the Robot 

3. Virtual Compliance Control 

3.1 Basic Controlling Expression 

In this section, we introduce the conventional compliance control for the target trajectory 
tracking of the foot tip. The motion equation for the robot's legs with three joints can be 
expressed as follows. 

~x- 

~ Xr ] 

Y- 

-Y r 

Z- 

z r _ 

336 Climbing and Walking Robots 

M(0)0 + C(0 9 0) + D<9 + K + P(0) = t+ J T (0)¥ (1) 

where, 0=[0\ 0i 6> 3 ] T is a vector of three joints of a leg, M(0) is the inertia matrix, C(# 9 #) is 
the item considering centrifugal force and coriolis force, D is the coefficient matrix of 
viscous friction, K is the coefficient matrix of stiffness friction, P is the item of gravity, x is 
the driving torque of the motor, J T is the jacobian matrix, and F is the item representing the 
external force added to the foot tip. 
According to Eq.(l), the driving input torque to the motors can be written as 

t = M(0)0 + h(0 9 0) - J T (0)¥ (2) 

h(<9, 0) = C(0, #) + D<9 + K<9 + P(0) 
Where, we define p e as a error vector between the target trajectories and the real trajectories 
based on the foot's coordinates. 

~x-x r ~ 

(3) 

p e obtained from above expression is used for compliance function between the force acting 
on foot. It is possible to control the foot trajectory tracking. 

F = C c p c +K c p c (4) 

substituting Equations (3) and (4) into Eq. (2), we can obtain the control input torque as 
follows: 

T = M(0)0 + h(0,0)-J r (0)(C cPe+ K c pJ (5) 

This expression is a basic control equation for the conventional compliance control. 

3.2 Virtual Compliance Force 

In this chapter, we introduce to add a virtual compliance force to change the trajectory of the 
foot before the foot contacts the ground. The advantage of adding the virtual compliance 
force is that the relative velocity between the foot and the ground when landing ground 
becomes zero, and then the contact collision can be decreased. 

Moreover, this virtual compliance is effective when leg takes off the ground. The 
conventional compliance control have a problem that the load of bottom of foot rapidly 
become zero when the foot taking off the ground, and the unbalance of the body happen 
rapidly too. So it need that our proposed virtual force can prevent unbalance to reduce foot 
load slowly. Where, we install a proximity sensor on the back side of the foot, and its 
effective range is set as 3 cm. Fig. 3 shows the outline model of the robot leg include 
proximity sensor and virtual force. Here, the proposed virtual compliance force is calculated 
using the q that is vector from root of leg to foot. 

F v =C v q+K v q (7) 

Where, F v is a virtual compliance force matrix, C v is a virtual viscosity gain matrix, K v is a 
virtual stiffness gain matrix, Eq. (6) can work effectively if the foot orbit far from the ideal 
one, so it is able to decelerate rapidly when proximity sensor perceives the obstacle. Fig. 4 
and Fig. 5 are showing a frame format of proximity sensor changing. 

Softly Stable Walk Using Phased Compliance 

Control with Virtual Force for Multi-Legged Walking Robot 

337 

Proximity 

sensor 

Fig. 3. Virtual compliance force 

7H 

x^ 

Y 

) 

3 cm 

1 1 

Fig. 4. Sensor off 

Fig. 5. Sensor on 

However, this virtual force is needed while foot is near the objects and sensor is on, if the 
foot moves far away from the ground and obstacle, this virtual force is not only unnecessary 
but also disturbs a smooth track along the ideal orbit. So that, we rewrite F v as follow. 

(6) 

(sensor off) 

[C v q+ K v q (sensor on) 

This virtual force divided in two cases to do flexible correspondence at the situation change. 
Concretely, when the sensor is off the virtual force F v is zero, and when the sensor is on the 
virtual force F v starts. Submitting the F v into Eq. (5), we can get the control torques for the 
three joints of one leg of multi-legged robot as follows. 

t = M(0)0 + h(0,0) - J r (6?)(C c p e + Kp e - F T ) 
t = M(0)0 + h(0,0) - J T (0)(Cj e + K c p,- C v q- K v q) 

(8) 

338 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

4. Phased Compliance Control 

In the conventional compliance control, because the compliance gain matrix keep constant in 
all phases of the movement of the swing leg, it is impossible to response all unexpected 
situation walking on irregular terrain where needed stability and flexible correspondence. 
Therefore, in this paper, we divide the walking movement into six phases shown as in Fig. 6, 
the compliance gain matrix C v , K v , C c , K c are variable in different phase. 

Phase 4 
Take down 

Phase 5 

Take down 

(Proximity sensor on) 

Phase 6 

Landing ground 

Phase 3 
Forward movement 

Phase 2 

Lifting up 

(Proximity sensor off) 

Phase 1 
Take-off ground 

3 

Fig. 8. Divided walking motion into six phases 

Phase 1 is a period from the foot starts taking off ground until the proximity sensor becomes 

off. In this phase, the main purpose is to slowly decrease the force load of the foot using the 

virtual compliance force. By adjusting virtual compliance gain matrix C v , K v the virtual force 

is generated to press the leg against ground and a smooth decrease in force load of the foot 

is achieved by slowly decreasing that virtual force. As a result, the generation of the impact 

power and a sudden balance-off of robot's body can be suppressed. 

Phase 2 is a leg lifting phase that the control from the proximity sensor becomes off until end 

position of lifting leg. This phase is important to follow the ideal orbit to recover the phase 

l's delay quickly. So the normal compliance gain C c , K c are enlarged, and the virtual 

compliance gain C v , K v make decrease to by the time when the proximity sensor becomes 

off. 

Phase 3 and 4 are the horizontal and descent movement of leg until the proximity sensor 

becomes on. These two phases are important to follow the ideal orbit, but horizontal 

movement have a danger of colliding with the obstacle toward x and y axially. As the 

measures, if the external force F is added to the foot, the normal compliance gain C c , K c in 

the x and y directions becomes small to avoid the obstacle. 

Phase 5 is a foot descend period from proximity sensor becomes on until the foot contacts 

with ground or obstacle. In this phase, deceleration of foot is put in preparation for contact 

with the object, and it has aimed to weaken the impact force when colliding. So that, the 

virtual compliance gain matrix C v , K v are greatly taken and the sudden deceleration is 

enable. 

Phase 6 is a control phase for the support leg that is not necessary to use virtual compliance. 

The normal compliance gain C c , K c are set large because it is necessary not only to follow the 

orbit of the support leg but also to support the weight of the body. In this paper, to this 

phase 6, we use a posture and vibration control based on virtual suspension model 

Softly Stable Walk Using Phased Compliance 

Control with Virtual Force for Multi-Legged Walking Robot 

339 

introduced in section 5 to generate torques for support legs to realize the stable posture of 

robot. 

Smooth movement suitable for the situation is possible to use phased division of such 

phased compliance control. 

5. A Hierarchical Control System Combined the Phased Compliance Control 
with a Posture and Vibration Control 

However, because the phased compliance control is applicable only to swing legs of multi- 
legged walking robot, we designed a hierarchical control system for multi-legged walking 
robot, which is combined the proposed phased compliance control with a posture and 
vibration control based on virtual suspension model, to realize the stable walking on 
unknown rough terrain. 

The control block diagram of the hierarchical control system is shown as in Fig. 9. According 
of this control block diagram, there are two parts in control system. The first part is a 
position control for swing legs using the phased compliance control designed in sections 3 
and 4. The second part is posture and vibration control of robot body for support legs. In 
this part, the VSM and SMC are virtual suspension model and sliding mode control for 
constraining the robot's posture and damping the changes of its posture (Q. Huang, et al., 
2004). And the CSM is Coordinate Shift Method proposed by our study, which can calculate 
the forces of each support leg to equilibrate the posture changes. The calculated forces are 
multiplied with the jacobian matrix, and are transported to the each joints of support leg. 
Where, we introduce the second part as follows. 

Phased Compliance Control for Swing Legs 

Hybrid position and force control 
Switch for support legs and swing legs 

Posture and Vibration Control for Support Legs 

Fig. 9. A hierarchical control system combined phased compliance control with posture and 
vibration control 

340 Climbing and Walking Robots 

5.1 Suspension Control Using Sliding Mode Control Based on the Virtual Dynamic 
Model 

To restrain the vibration of robot body, a suspension model is built in this study. As shown 
in Fig. 10, the ground is assumed to be rigid; a suspension model of one degree of freedom 
with virtual springs and dampers is designed in the vertical direction, the direction of the 
pitch angle, and the direction of the roll angle, respectively (Q. Huang, et al., 2004). In Fig. 10, 
the vertical direction of the robot body is defined to be the z coordinate axis, the advancing 
direction of the robot is defined to be the y coordinate axis, and the direction crosshatched to 
the above two directions is defined to be the x coordinate axis. 

i Vertical 

*"""% Roll angle 
Pitch angle 

7* 

Fig. 10. The virtual suspension model considering of active control input and disturbances 

Here, z, 6 V , 6 r are defined to be the changes in the vertical direction, the directions of the 
pitch angle and the roll angle from the balance place, respectively. In order to improve the 
excessive characteristic of the system response and to minify the overshot, the damping 
coefficient £ is selected to be within 0.7-1.0. Besides, the natural angular frequency con is 
enlarged as much as possible to avoid resonance because the vibrations in the vertical 
direction, the directions of the pitch angle and the roll angle, the disturbances from collisions 
and slippage between the ground and the robot leg, and dynamic changes of the supported 
weight and the centre of gravity are within low frequency. Furthermore, because of the 
enlarging of the natural angular frequency co^, good stability and excessive response 
characteristics within a wide frequency band can be realized in the virtual suspension 
dynamic system. Therefore, in this study, the natural angular frequency con and the damping 
coefficient <^are selected respectively as follows, 

^=250 co ny = 250 co nz = 60 
g x = 0.800 g x = 0.800 g x = 0.800 (8) 

The body weight and rotary moment of inertia of the six-legged walking robot in this study 
are 

I x = 1.072[kgm 2 ] I y = 0.906[kgm 2 ] M = 16.753[kg] 

According of the natural angular frequency coa and the damping coefficient Q the 

parameters of the proposed virtual dynamic model are as follows, 

K z = 167530.0[N/m] C z = 26S0.5[Ns/m] 
K p = 67000.0[Nm/rad] C v = 428.8f Nms / rad] 
K r = 56643.8[Nm/rad] C r = 428.8[ Nms / rad] 

Softly Stable Walk Using Phased Compliance 

Control with Virtual Force for Multi-Legged Walking Robot 

341 

Where, the control input u X/ u y , and u z were designed by using sliding mode control 
(Q. Huang, et al, 2004; Q. Huang, et al, 2007; K. Nonami and H. Tian, 1994; X. Zhong, et al, 
2007). So that, the motion equations for the vertical direction, the directions of the pitch 
angle of robot body and the roll angle of robot body are defined as 

(M+ M(t,6sw))'i = -K z z-Czz + Uz+Zz 
ylx + Ix\t,6sw))0j) = —Kpup — Cpup + Up + Zp 
(Iy + Iy(t,6sw))0r = —Kr&r ~ C-rOr + Ur + Zr 

(9) 
(10) 
(11) 

In this study, we designed the same control system for the vertical direction, the direction of 
the pitch angle, and the direction of the roll angle. Here, only the designed sliding mode 
control of one-type style servo system in the direction of the pitch angle is introduced. In the 
designed sliding mode control, the integral value of the difference between the target pitch 
angle and the actual pitch angle is defined to be a new state variable. Substituting the new 
state variable z en into Eq. (9), an extended state equation can be derived. The extended state 
equation and the switching function a are 

x e = Ax e +Bu+Qr + Fd 

Zen =\(r-6p)dt 

S = S Xen 

Xe=[Zen Op Op] d = Z 

(12) 

and, A, B, Q are expressed by 

-1 

T 

1 

B = 

Q = 

— Kp / lp 

Cp / lp 

l/lp 

Where, r is the target value of the pitch angle, and is zero here, d is the term denoting the 
disturbances. In sliding mode control, if the equivalent control input u eq is without 
consideration of disturbances, from a = & = , the linear input U\ v can be obtained from 

uip =u eq =-(SBr 1 (SAx e +SQr) (13) 

Switching matrix S is solved by using the solution of the Riccati equation. The real 
component of the eigenvalue of the equivalent control system is -50 here. The nonlinear 
input of the sliding mode control u n i v is expressed by 

Unlp=~k(SB) 1 

<7\ + rj 

(14) 

Nonlinear input u n \ v compensates for the uncertainty of the system, as the control input to 
constrain the system state variables within the switching plane. Here, the coefficient to 
repress the disturbances k = 8600, and the coefficient to avoid the chattering r/= 0.1. 
Therefore, the input of the sliding mode control is $u$, which is composed of the linear 
control input u\ v and the nonlinear control input u n \ v . 

342 Climbing and Walking Robots 

6. Experiment and Discussion 

6.1 Preparations for the Experiment 

Because the purpose of this study is to restrain the vibration in the z direction and the 
directions of the pitch angle and the roll angle of the robot body when the robot walks, it is 
necessary to obtain the outputs in these three directions. As to the output angles in the 
directions of the pitch angle and the roll angle, they were measured by a slant sensor. In the 
vertical direction, the output can be calculated from the size of the robot body and the forces 
in the vertical direction of each leg. Here, in order to save the cost, we don't use the force 
sensor to observe the forces of each leg, rather than use the motor pseudo-torque. 

6.1.1 The Observation by Using the Motor Pseudo-Torque 

The motor torque is obtained by multiplying a torque coefficient to the motor electric 
current. However, because the vibration caused by noise is too big, instead of the motor 
torque, a pseudo-torque is used as the input torque. The pseudo-torque is the calculated 
torque of one sampling time before. In the servo electric circuit, the calculated pseudo- 
torque approximates to the actual consumed torque. Therefore, using the pseudo-torque, 
there is no the influence by the noise. Of course, a delay of one sampling time arises 
simultaneously. The influence caused by the delay can be ignored if the sampling time is 
small enough. 

6.1.2 Conversion from Motor Torque to Force of the Tip of Each Leg 

The force of the tip of leg, / = [f x fy fz] , was calculated from the size of each link and 
the inverse of Jacobi matrix. The force of the tip of leg can be obtained as expressed as 
follows. 

/ = (/ t )" 1 t (15) 

f hsin02+tecos(02+03)T3 , ^ 

fasis =T2+ ; — — (16) 

J l3COS(02+03) K ' 

1 
fz = fasis (T7) 

I2tan(02 + 03)sin02 + cos02 y ' 

f- 1 ( n 

tan 0i I h cos 02 + h sin(02 + 03) , 

(18) 

+ — tan(02 + 03)fz 

l3COs(02+03) 

sin 0i \ h cos 02 + h sin(02 +03) J tan 0i 

6.2 Experimental Results 

The experiments were performed by two kinds of gaits. The first is with one swing leg and 
five support legs called as pentapod gait; the second is with three swing legs and three 
support legs called as tripod gait. According of the walking experiments, the stable walking 
of the pentapod gait and the tripod gait were realized shown as in Fig. 11 and Fig. 12. Where, 
the experimental results of these two kinds of gait are introduced and discussed as follows. 

Softly Stable Walk Using Phased Compliance 

Control with Virtual Force for Multi-Legged Walking Robot 

343 

**z 

*£~ ^.IfjP^H 

-1^ 

Li 

* : ~|~^Pr5S^5 

F ""f!l 

1 

r i 

.iirniB ir 

■ ■ ■■*!. -^dU 

1 

, .=_ ^ 

' "" \ ' ' 

,-, 

Fig. 11. Pentapod gaite walking 

Fig. 12. Tripod gait walking 

6.2.1 Pentapod gait 

Pentapod gait is excellent in stability instead of slow the speed because always five legs are 
the support legs. Details of walking operation are shown Fig. 13. According to figure the 
legs are sequentially moved. Each parameter in pentapod gait shows as follows. 

Length f tride = 180 [mm] 
Max height of foot = 80 [mm] 
Time of one step = 0.75 [s] 

344 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Legl 

Support Phase Swing Phase 

Leg2 

! 1 1 

Leg3 

■ 1 1 

Leg4 

1 

1 1 

Leg5 

Leg6 

1 

i i i i i i i i 

i i i 

■ 

0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 

Time [sec] 
Fig. 13. Pentapod gait 

The results of walking with pentapod gait are shown in Fig. 14~Fig. 19. In these figures, the 
dotted lines show the results of the conventional compliance control using the Eq. (5); the 
solid lines show the results of our proposed phased compliance control with virtual force. 

-20 r 
-22- 
-24- 
1-26 

N 

-28- 
-30- 

-32- 

0.75 

1.35 

1.50 

0.95 1.15 

Time [sec] 
Fig. 14. Foot position change in Z direction using the conventional position control 

0.75 

0.95 

1.35 

1.50 

1.15 
Time [sec] 

Fig. 15. Foot position change in Z direction using the proposed compliance control 

Softly Stable Walk Using Phased Compliance 

Control with Virtual Force for Multi-Legged Walking Robot 

345 

- — Proposed method 
■*: " Conventional method 

Sensor on 

32 1_ i 

1.40 1.45 

Time [sec] 
Fig. 16. Close-up of the landing ground in Z direction 

50 

1.50 

40 

^30 

£20 

10 

°0 0.5 

Fig. 17. Force load of the foot of leg 3 

0.06 

Proposed method 

- - - Conventional method 

1 

\ 
4 

<• 'l 

i-lt^vW 

|;*/\,s, _ i 

vV'* ' 

ii 

. 

i 
i 

i 

1 1.5 

Time [sec] 

0.5 

1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 
Time [sec] 

Fig. 18. Changes of the roll angle of body 

346 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

0.02 

0.015 
■— , 0.01 

" 0.005 

jo 

- 

£ -0.005 

-0.01 

-0.015 

-0.02 

— - Proposed method 
--■- Conventional method 

hi i 

)V": 

x ! 

•\l' v 

1 ' 
1 I 

t Foot lifting 

1 and landing point 

I' 
1« 

0.5 

1.5 2 2.5 3 
Time [sec] 

3.5 

4,5 

Fig. 19. Changes of the pitch angle of body 

Firstly, according of Figures 14 and 15, about the changes in Z direction of the end position 
of the swing foot, both the proposed phased compliance control with virtual and the 
conventional compliance control are almost realized the ideal position finally. But in the 
time 0.75 sec~0.95 sec of lifting leg and 1.30 sec~1.50 sec of landing leg, the delay in the 
proposed phased compliance control with virtual force occurred that caused foot load 
slowly decreasing at phase 1 and slowing increasing at the phase 5 and phase 6 shown as in 
Fig. 17, so the changes of pitch angle and roll angle of the robot body become smaller than 
the results of the conventional compliance control shown as in Fig. 18 and Fig. 19. 
The close-up of Z direction coordinates in the time 1.3 sec~1.5 sec of landing swing leg is 
shown Fig. 16. We can see that the proposed compliance control with virtual force generates 
a virtual force in the positive direction of Z direction coordinates at the time as the 
proximity sensor switched on. 

And then, in Fig. 17, we can see the impact force between the foot and the terrain is reduced 
about 70% using our proposed method than the one using the conventional compliance 
control. And, according of Fig. 18 and Fig. 19, in the case of the proposed phased compliance 
control with virtual force, the changes of pitch angle and roll angle of the robot body are 
decreased about 50% than the results of the conventional compliance control. Especially, the 
biggest changes of pitch angle and roll angle of the robot body at the switch timing of lifting 
and landing the leg, have been decreased, because the control in phase 1, phase 5 and phase 
6 work well using the virtual compliance force and impact force is decreased. 

6.2.2 Tripod gait 

Details of walking operation of tripod gait are shown Fig. 20. Each parameter in tripod gait 
shows as follows. 

Length of stride = 180 [mm] 
Max height of foot = 80 [mm] 
Time of one step = 0.75 [s] 

Softly Stable Walk Using Phased Compliance 

Control with Virtual Force for Multi-Legged Walking Robot 

347 

J Support Phase | | Swing Phase 

Legl 

1 1 

Leg2 

1 1 1 

Leg3 

1 1 1 1 

Leg4 

1 1 1 1 

Leg5 

! 

Leg6 

1 

1 

0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 

Time [sec] 

Fig. 20. Tripod gait 

60 

50 

_40 

830 

S-H 

o 
20 

10 

°0 0.2 

Fig. 21. Force load of the foot of leg 1 

60 
50 

_40 

g 
830 

o 

20 

10 

°0 0.2 

Fig. 22. Force load of the foot of leg 4 

Proposed method 

Conventional method 

A ! 1 

• i 

■ i 

"' ""i" 
i i 

■ i 

■ i 

_ 

J 

S : 

0.4 
Time [sec] 

0.6 

0.8 

— Proposed method 
Conventional method 

n 

1 1 

1 ' ' 
1 i i 

ft 

I 

0.4 
Time [sec] 

0.6 

0.8 

348 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

0.02 

0.01 

^ 

bfj 

I -o.oi 

O 

-0.02 

-0.03 

Proposed method 
Conventional method 

0.2 0.4 0.6 

Time [sec] 
Fig. 23. Changes of the roll angle of body 

0.01 
0.005 

0.75 

^ 
S -0.005 

-0.01 

-0.015 

-0.02 

— Proposed method 
Conventional method 

li 

* \ / '\ 

— \ v ■-■/ y \\ 

- i '-■■ 

\ /; 

0.6 

0.75 

0.2 0.4 

Time [sec] 
Fig. 24. Changes of the pitch angle of body 

As the same results of the pentapod gait, in the time 0.0 sec~0.1 sec of lifting leg and 0.70 
sec~0.78 sec of landing leg, the delay in the proposed phased compliance control with 
virtual force occurred that caused foot load slowly decreasing at phase 1 and slowing 
increasing at the phase 5 and phase 6 shown as in Fig. 21 and Fig. 22, so the changes of pitch 
angle and roll angle of the robot body become smaller than the results of the conventional 
compliance control shown as in Fig. 23 and Fig. 24. The impact force between the foot and 
the terrain is reduced about 70%, the changes of pitch angle and roll angle of the robot body 
are decreased about 50% using our proposed method comparing with the results using the 
conventional compliance control. 

According of the above walking experimental results of pentapod gait and tripod gait, we 
can see the efficiency of our proposed compliance control with virtual force in aspect of 
decreasing the impact force between the foot and the terrain for multi-legged robot. 

Softly Stable Walk Using Phased Compliance 

Control with Virtual Force for Multi-Legged Walking Robot 349 

7. Conclusion 

For the multi-legged walking robot, in order to decrease impact force between the foot and 
the terrain when the foot lifting and landing to realize its better stability, we did the 
following studies. 

We introduced a phased compliance control using virtual compliance force for multi-legged 
walking robot, which can effectively reduce the impact force when the robot walks. 
Concretely, we add a virtual compliance force to change the trajectory of the foot before the 
foot contacts the ground based on the conventional compliance control. And then, we divide 
the walking movement into six phases to adjust the compliance gain to realize reducing the 
impact force when robot lifting and landing leg in the same walking speed as the 
conventional compliance control. 

We designed a hierarchical control system for multi-legged walking robot, which is 
combined the proposed phased compliance control with a posture and vibration control 
based on virtual suspension model, to realize the stable walking on unknown rough terrain. 
According of the walking experimental results of pentapod gait and tripod gait using a six- 
legged robot, the impact force between the foot and the terrain is reduced about 70%, the 
changes of pitch angle and roll angle of the robot body are decreased about 50% using our 
introduced method comparing with the results using the conventional compliance control, 
so the effectiveness of the proposed method for multi-legged walking robot was verified. 

8. References 

D. Wettergreen, C. Thorpe (1996). Developing Planning and Active Control for a Hexapod 

Robot, Proc. 1996 IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, pp. 2718-2723. 
T. Kubota, H. Katoh, I. Nakatani (2000). Walking Rover with Multiple Legs for Planetary 

Exploration, Proc. of the Third Int. Conf. on Climbing and Walking Robots, pp. 795-788. 
Q. Huang, K. Nonami, etc. (2000). CAD Model Based Autonomous Locomotion of 

Quadruped Robot by Using Correction of Trajectory Planning with RNN, Special 

Issue on Frontiers of Motion and Vibration Control, JSME International Journal, 

Series C, Vol. 43, No. 3, pp. 653-663. 
Q. Huang, K. Nonami (2002). Neuro-Based Position and Force Hybrid Control of Six-Legged 

Walking Robot, Special Issue on Modern Trends on Mobile Robotics, Journal of 

Robotics and Mechatronics, Vol. 14, No. 4, pp. 534-543. 
Q. Huang, K. Nonami (2003). Humanitarian Mine Detecting Six-Legged Walking Robot and 

Hybrid Neuro Walking Control with Position/ Force Control, Special Issue on 

Computational Intelligence in Mechatronic Systems, Mechatronics, Elsevier, Vol. 13, 

No. 8-9, pp. 773-790. 
K. Nonami, Q. Huang, etc. (2003). Development and Control of Mine Detection Robot 

COMET-II and COMET-III, JSME International Journal, Series C, Vol. 46, No. 3, pp. 

881-890. 
Q. Huang, M. Yanai, K. Oon, K. Nonami (2004). Robust Control of Posture and Vibration 

Based on Virtual Suspension Model for Six-Legged Walking Robot, Proceedings of 

the 7th international conference of Motion and Vibration Control, Washington 

University in St. Louis, America, CD-ROM, No. 41. 

350 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Q. Huang, Y. Fukuhara, X. Chen (2007). Posture and Vibration Control Based on Virtual 
Suspension Model Using Sliding Mode Control for Six-Legged Walking Robot, 
Special Issue on New Trends of Motion and Vibration Control, Journal of System 
Design and Dynamics, the JSME Dynamics, Mesurement and Control Division, 
Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 180-191. 

J. Huang, I. Toda, M. Matsuura (2002). Control a Redundant Robot Using Visual 
Information: Avoidance Control of a Moving Obstacle, Transactions of the Japan 
Society of Mechanical Engineers, Series C, Vol. 68, No. 674, pp. 2999-3006. 

R. Quint (1998). Active leg compliance for passive walking, Proceedings of the 1998 IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation. 

V. Mut, O. Nasisi, R. Carelli, B. Kuchen (1998). Tracking Adaptive Impedance Robot Control 
With Visual Feedback, Proceedings of the 1998 IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics and Automation. 

X. Chen, H. Kano (2005). Dynamic Vision Based Motion Recovery, International Journal of 
Innovative Computing, Information and Control, Vol. 1, No. 3, pp. 509-525. 

T. Tsuji, H. Akamatsu, M. Kaneko (1997). Non-Contact Impedance Control for Redundant 
Manipulators Using Visual Information, Proceedings of the 1997 IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation. 

Q. Huang, K. Oka, X. Chen (2008). Phased Compliance Control with Virtual Force for Six- 
legged Walking Robot, Special Issue on New Trends in Advanced Control and 
Applications, International Journal of Innovative Computing, Information and Control, 
Vol. 4, No. 12, pp. 3359-3373. 

K. Nonami, H. Tian (1994). Sliding Mode Control, CORONA Publishing Co., Ltd. (In 
Japanese) 

X. Zhong, H. Xing and K. Fujimoto (2007). Sliding Mode Variable Structure Control for 
Uncertain Stochastic Systems, International Journal of Innovative Computing, 
Information and Control, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 397-406. 

21 

Biohybrid Walking Microrobot 
with Self-assembled Cardiomyocytes 

Jinseok Kim a , Eui-Sung Yoon a and Sukho Park b 

a Nano-Bio Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology 
b School of Mechanical Systems Engineering, Chonnam National University 

Republic of Korea 

1. Introduction 

1.1. Introduction to Microactuator 

Since the late 1980s, due to the rapid progress in MEMS (Micro Electro Mechanical System) 
technology, various types of mechanical structures, micro size sensors and actuators, could 
be fabricated, and technological progress in VLSI and SMT (Surface Mounting Technology) 
has contributed to the miniaturization of many electronic parts, which has led to the active 
development of microrobots. With the development of microrobots, research on the 
integration technology of micro actuators and micro sensors for microrobots has been in 
strong demand. Previously developed electric motors have advantages of over 90% high 
conversion efficiency and handling convenience. Miniaturized conventional actuators can be 
used as actuators of microrobot, but miniaturization rapidly decreases the drive force. 
Therefore, to move very small size equipment, a small actuator device based on a new 
actuation principle is needed [1]. 

Recently, MEMS micromachining of SMA (Shape Memory Alloy), Piezoelectric Ceramic 
Material and functional polymer material has been used to develop a new actuator. This 
new actuator has drawn attention as a suitable actuator for a microsystem. This new 
actuator can be miniaturized and made lighter, and especially, its generating power per 
weight ratio is much higher than those of conventional electromotive and hydraulic 
actuators. Therefore, it is expected to be suitable for miniature robots and microrobots [2]. 

Many other small and light actuators can produce much power. Because their structure 
materials and drive principles are diverse, their suitability of miniaturization must be 
evaluated, and their characteristics must be fully understood with careful consideration of 
the applications. 

Electrostatic and electromagnetic motors are representative micro actuators. Because their 
generated powers are proportioned to the area of the electrode, they are more advantageous 
in miniaturization than previous actuators, whose powers are proportioned to the volume. 

352 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Therefore, US-centered research has been actively developing micromotors, whose 
revolving part is smaller than the diameter of a hair strand by using silicon micromachining. 
Also, physical and chemical phenomena can be used as a micro actuator. For example, 
thermal expansion, piezoelectric effect, electric chemical reaction in addition to static 
electricity can be adopted as new actuation methods. Also, because each drive method has 
its own merits, the drive method that is suitable for meeting the actuation power 
requirements of the applied microsystem can be selected, so the most suitable design of the 
drive mechanism is needed. The basic requirements for micro actuators to be applied 
effectively to micro robots are as follows: compactness, light weight, high power density, 
high efficiency, good controllability, etc. 

Polymers have many attractive characteristics; they are lightweight, inexpensive, fracture 
tolerant, and pliable. During the last twenty years, new polymers have emerged an 
additional important characteristic. This capability of the electroactive polymers (EAPs) has 
attracted much attention. Since they behave very similar to biological muscles, EAPs have 
acquired the moniker "artificial muscles." In the foreseeable future, robotic mechanisms 
actuated by EAPs will enable engineers to create devices previously imaginable only in 
science fiction [3]. 

Conventional microactuators use electrostatic, electromagnetic, pneumatic, piezoelectric, or 
thermal forces and require external power sources for operation. Although these actuators 
have been used in micro- and nano-scale systems, they have limitations in independent 
operation, such as in locomotion in a human digestive organ or migration in blood vessels. 
Unlike conventional actuators, cell-based actuators can use the glucose in physiological 
fluids as an energy source by converting glucose into ATP, and transforming this chemical 
energy into mechanical energy. Integrated systems like these cell-based actuators have been 
called hybrid systems, representing the material characteristics of micro- or nano-scale 
fabricated structures and biological components such as proteins and cells [4-5]. 

Actuator type 

Max. Pressure 
(MPa) 

Max. 
Efficiency (%) 

Dielectric Elastomers 

16.2 

60-80 

Electrostrict Polymer 

15 

- 

Electromagnetic (Voice coil) 

0.1 

>90 

Piezoelectric 

110-131 

>90 

PVDF 

4.8 

- 

SMA 

>200 

<10 

Mechano-chemical polymer 
(Polyelectrolyte) 

0.3 

30 

Natural Muscle 
(Human skeleton) 

0.35 

>35 

Natural Muscle 

(Mouse cardiac myocytes) 

0.00905 

- 

Table 1. Comparison with the capabilities of various microactuators [3] 

Biohybrid Walking Microrobot with Self-assembled Cardiomyocytes 353 

Natural muscles are considered highly optimized systems since they are fundamentally the 
same for all animals and the difference between species are small. The operation of muscles 
depends on chemically driven reversible hydrogen bonding between two polymers, actin 
and myosin. The reason why this paper chose the cardiac muscle of rat as an actuator for 
microrobot is that the cardiac muscle does not need external stimulation. 

1.2. Muscle Powered Microrobot 

Biomimetic refers to human-made processes, materials, devices, or systems that imitate 
nature. Billions of years of " natural R&D" have resulted in effective, optimized biological 
solutions that really work. By studying and mimicking nature's processes and structures, 
scientists and engineers can develop nature inspired solutions that are far more effective 
than solutions conceived and developed exclusively by man. Biomimetic artificial machines 
built with hybrid components (materials partly synthetic and partly biological in origin) 
offer the opportunity to combine enhanced sensitivity with robustness and the possibility to 
extend their application to diverse environmental conditions [6]. As examples of 
micro/ nano machine using hybridization between organic and inorganic components, 
researches on adenosine triphosphate (ATP) biomolecular motors [7,8], a microorganism 
carrier in microchannel [9], a walking microdevice driven by micromuscle [10,11], and a 
pump actuated by cultured cardiomyocytes [12] were reported. Although, bimolecular 
motors are interesting, they can generate only between 5-60 pN forces [13] and are not 
robust to actuate microstructures. Micromuscles can be an alternative to microactuator for a 
micro-sized biomimetic system. Previous studies using cell based actuators [11-12] have 
shown very attractive results, but for advanced biomimetic systems, understanding and 
exploiting higher-order assemblies for micromuscles are key points of today's quest [6]. 
Structure and functional changes ensue in cardiac cell networks when cells are guided by 
three-dimensional scaffold topography, such as enhanced actin cytoskeleton organization, 
higher nuclear eccentricity [14] and altering gene expression, protein localization [15-16], cell 
signaling [17] and the intracellular calcium dynamics [18]. These topology-induced changes 
are expected to enhance the mechanical activity of cells [14]. However, until now, there has 
been no suitable tool to validate this enhancement. 

We propose a biomimetic micromachine made of a silicone elastomer polydimethylsiloxane 
(PDMS) and self organized cardiomyocytes, which allows free motions in physiological 
liquids based on the increase of cell power in a 3D microenvironment. The fabrication 
method and the formation and function of the legs in the machines mimic the bottom-up 
process of nature, the patterns in jelly fish and the functions of a real heart. Fig.l shows the 
microrobot structure mimicking the legs of a jelly fish. 

To make it move like the synchronized motion of a jellyfish without external power supply, 
we primarily cultured the heart cells of a mouse on the microrobot device and used the 
beating motion of the heart cells as a power source. Also, to mimic the muscle bundle 
structure on the legs of a jellyfish, we made in vivo-like grooved surfaces. From this, we 
could obtain motions of the machine driven by the contractility of 3D controlled 
cardiomyocytes. We found the obvious increase of mechanical activity of cardiomyocytes in 
the grooved surfaces compared with that in flat surfaces by using culturing cardiomyocytes 
on flat and grooved PDMS microcantilevers. We can suggest the increase of force due to the 

354 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

arrangement and increment of the cells in the same area. The process and materials used in 
this study is noninvasive to cells, and have the potential of high throughput of the 
microdevice. 

Fig. 1. A. Concept design to mimic the Ephyra of the moon jelly fish. Muscle bundles in 
middle of legs are used for movement. B. Mimicked polymer based backbone structure of a 
microrobot 

2. Biopolymer Hybrid Devices 

2.1. Design of biopolymer actuator & sensor 

2.1.1. Flat surface cantilever 

In this study, a microcantilever was designed and fabricated, using both synthetic and 
natural materials. Living cells were cultured on a cantilever made of flexible transparent 
PDMS elastomer. Therefore, the proposed cantilever can be considered as a hybrid 
biopolymer cantilever. PDMS has a low Young's modulus, which can be tuned from 360 to 
868 kPa by controlling the ratios of its components [19], and thus is extremely sensitive to 
external stress and can be used to achieve large deflections. PDMS is also inexpensive, 
optically transparent and suitable for use with optical detection methods. Additionally, it is 
compatible with uses in biological studies because it is impermeable to water, nontoxic to 
cells, and permeable to gases. Finally, it can be easily fabricated and bonded to other 
surfaces [20]. Culturing primary cardiomyocytes on the microcantilever leads to self- 
organization of the cells on the structure, giving a parallel arrangement of cells in the hybrid 
system. The system can thus avoid problems arising from inefficient dissection and 
attachment of the muscle tissue to the microsystem by hand. Since the presented system was 
realized with simple micromolding a technique using PDMS, a large quantity of samples 
can be produced cheaply and easily. Our method is also safe and noninvasive, because the 
entire device is biocompatible and there are no hard contacts or structural constraints that 
can affect myocytes function or morphology. The important feature in our system over 
previous contractile force measurement techniques is that our system can quantitatively 
measure contractile forces on a specific microsized area in real time, and this capability 
should open opportunities for better understanding of the mechanisms of heart failure and 

Biohybrid Walking Microrobot with Self-assembled Cardiomyocytes 355 

promote further design of optimal microscale hybrid biopolymer actuators and 
microdevices. 

2.1.2. Cell culture 

The cardiomyocytes on the microcantilevers were obtained by aseptically isolating the heart 
of a neonatal Sprague-Dawley rat at day 1 and briefly washing it with Hank's balanced salt 
solution (Gibco Invitrogen Co., Grand Island, NY). After removing the ventricles, the 
remaining tissues were minced and incubated in a 0.3 mg/mL collagenase solution 
containing 0.6 mg/mL pancretin (Sigma Chemical Co.). The isolated cardiomyocytes were 
seeded directly onto the hybrid biopolymer cantilever at a cell density of 5_103 cells/ mm2 
and cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagles' medium (Gibco Invitrogen) containing 10% 
fetal bovine serum (Sigma), 50 mg/mL streptomycin, and 50 mg/mL penicillin (Gibco 
Invitrogen) at 37 1C in air with 5% C02. The cell activation level reached its maximum after 
72-96 h of culture. The motion of the microcantilevers was measured at the 96th hour by 
using two microscopes, which monitored lateral and vertical motions, as described in Park et 
al. (2005) [21]. 

2.1.3. Molding master fabrication 

By using a flexible and thin PDMS matrix layer, we intended to maximize the bending 
displacement of thin PDMS by generating a force through the arrangement of contractile 
cardiomyocytes. The flexible and thin PDMS matrix layer was fabricated by the sandwich 
molding process [22], as shown in Fig. 2. The sandwich molding process is a useful 
technique and was used to create a PDMS 3D microrobot structure with an ideal thickness 
of ,20 mm by pouring PDMS between a bottom Si wafer master and a top glass wafer master 
and then compressing the layers. The bottom master was fabricated on the Si wafer using a 
deep silicon etching process and a thick negative photoresist (PR) (SU-8). First, grooves were 
patterned onto a new silicon wafer using an AZ1512 PR. The Si wafer was then deeply 
etched to fabricate a grooved surface, as shown in Fig. 1(a). After removing the AZ1512 PR, 
the Si wafer was coated with SU-8 to develop the legs of the microrobot, as shown in Fig. 
1(b). The microrobot legs were fabricated from the bottom Si master so that the grooved 
shape would be on the leg surface. The microrobot body was fabricated from the top glass 
master. After coating the glass wafer with a Cr/ Au layer, we patterned the microrobot body 
using the AZ1512 PR, as shown in Fig. 1(c). Finally, the top master fabrication was 
completed by removing the Cr/Au layer from the etched glass wafer, as shown in Fig. 1(d). 

2.1.4. Polymer device fabrication 

Several previous reports have investigated the fabrication of 3D structures with 
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). The most common molding method is the sandwich 
molding technique using a single molding master [22, 23] In this method, the master, 
another flat wafer, and the PDMS are all stacked together to produce the 3D PDMS 
structures. Unfortunately, this method only allows specific geometries to be created on one 
side. Although a method for fabricating microstructures on both sides has been developed, 
it does not easily yield thin micromembranes and is difficult to use for wafer-level 
fabrication since the PDMS used as the top master is too flexible for high-pressure 
applications and may shrink during curing, particularly over areas greater than 1 cm 2 . To 

356 Climbing and Walking Robots 

overcome these problems, we propose a 3D molding aligner system that can align the two 
mold masters and stack them under high pressure to fabricate a 3D structure with 
micromembranes at the wafer level. To facilitate the detachment of the PDMS structures, the 
top and bottom masters were coated by plasma polymerization of C4F8 using inductively 
coupled plasma-reactive ion etcher (ICPRIE). The PDMS mixture was poured onto the 
bottom master, as shown in Fig. 1(e). After the top master was placed on the PDMS mixture, 
the stack, comprised of the bottom master, the PDMS, and the top master, was placed 
between two aluminum plates. To align the two masters using the 3D mold aligner, the 
geometries of the two masters were observed through the windows at the top of the wafer 
chuck. The two masters could be aligned to a precision of less than 2 mm using an optical 
microscope. Following the alignment, the stacked bottom master, PDMS, and top master 
were clamped, as shown in Fig. 1(f). The clamped stack was cured in an oven for 2 h at 100 
°C. After curing, a thin PDMS replica was peeled from the master, as shown in Fig. 1(g). 

Fig. 2. Fabrication process of the PDMS microrobot. (a) Etched groove pattern on the bottom 
Si master, (b) Coated and patterned SU-8 layer on the bottom Si master, (c) Patterned Cr/ Au 
layer on the top glass master, (d) Etched pattern on the top glass master, (e) Poured PDMS 
between the top and bottom masters, (f) Clamped top and bottom masters, (g) Detaching the 
molded PDMS 

Figure 3 shows the concept of the process for making a hybrid device by primarily culturing 
neonatal rat heart cells on a micro device made with PDMS polymer. As reason for making a 
hybrid device and its working principle were previously explained, and the detailed 
fabrication method and process will be directly explained in this chapter. 

Biohybrid Walking Microrobot with Self-assembled Cardio myocytes 357 

Fig. 3. Full preparation process of microrobot to observe the motion(l) Extract heart single 
cell from neonatal rat heart, (2) Prepared PDMS structure, whose surface will culture the 
cardiomyocytes , (3) Primary cardiomyocytes culture on the culture dish including PDMS 
structure, (4) Incubating cultured cardiomyocytes, (5) Detach PDMS structure from the 
original culture dish and move to a new culture dish to observe the movement of the PDMS 
structure, (6) Schematic image to observe the vertical movement, (7) Microscopic image of 
the vertical view, (8) Schematic image to observe the lateral movement, (9) Microscopic 
image of the lateral movement. 

2.1.5. Engineered surface cantilever to concentrate the contraction force 

A heart attack is the most dreaded heart disease. And chronic heart attacks, even slow-going, 
are the most common and fatal. Heart muscles weaken slowly and its cells simply can't 
contract. In this case, each heart muscle cell has longer pulsation and loses its force. 
Therefore, the information on the contractile force of the heart cell is expected to play an 
important role in finding the basic remedy and substitution for cells with heart disease [24]. 
Although force measurements at the cellular tissue and whole organ levels have been 
performed [25-26], influence from outside factors cannot be entirely excluded, giving rise to 
inaccurate measurements of the force of heart cells. Therefore, there have been several 
approaches proposed and methods developed to measure the contractile force of 
cardiomyocytes either directly or indirectly. 

In the first approach, micro fabrication technology was used to make a force transducer that 
would reduce the size of the device for measuring the contractile force of cardiomyocytes 
[27]. In this system, two micro clamps hold each end of a cardiomyocyte cell to measure the 
contractile force of the cell. However, this approach involves cell manipulations, which may 
have unknown effects on the cells and their functions. 

In the second approach, an array of micro-scale elastic posts was developed. The attached 
cells bend each post independently because the forces of a cell for adhesion were used 
locally. Poly-(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) pillar arrays were used as elastic posts [28]. 
However, the contact between the cell and the heads of pillars may have some effects on cell 
membranes and cardiomyocytes functions. Moreover, the spreading and morphology of the 
cell on the flat surface and on the pillar show different aspects, which seems to have a great 
influence on the contractile force of the cardiomyocytes cell. 

The difference of the force of cardiomyocyte cells due to the surface change of the 
cantilevers was measured. Cantilevers are often used in MEMS devices, not only as 

358 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

actuators but also as sensors. The microcantilever can be used as a sensitive 
chemical/ biological sensor through mechanical methods, by detecting the deflection of the 
cantilever due to surface stress. PDMS was used as the material of a biopolymer cantilever. 
PDMS is inexpensive, optically transparent, and suitable for use with optical detection 
methods. Also, it can be easily made and bonded to other surfaces [29]. 

Cell thickness 
Sum" 

;ness 

15um 

Flat microcantilever 

Grooved microcantilever 

3 Cell 

Fig. 4. Schematics of a cross-section of a 3D hybrid biopolymer microcantilever structure: 
left is a flat microcantilever and right is a grooved microcantilever. 

The hybrid biopolymer microcantilever array consisted of five different sizes of 
microcantilevers, which were 50, 100, 150, 200, and 300um wide and five times the widths in 
length, respectively. However, all cantilevers were 20 urn thick. It was found that cantilevers 
longer than 1 mm frequently stuck onto the substrate or were bent, probably due to both the 
flexibility of the PDMS microcantilever and the cell mass formed by the self organizing cells. 
Therefore, as mentioned, all data obtained from cantilevers longer than 1 mm were 
eliminated. As the difference occurred in thickness in a grooved cantilever unlike the surface 
flat cantilever shown in Figure 4, the structural deflection change ratio was verified on the 
same force before culturing the cardiomyocytes cell. 

SI 

S2 

S3 

S4 

S5 

S6 

Ave. 

S.D. 

Displacement increment 
percentage of the grooved 
cantilever (%) 

25.8 

24.2 

39.5 

39.2 

35.6 

25.7 

31.7 

7.2 

Contractile force increment 
percentage of the grooved 
cantilever (%) (analytical solution) 

69.5 

67.4 

88.0 

87.7 

82.8 

69.4 

77.5 

8.9 

Contractile force increment 
percentage of the grooved 
cantilever (%) (FEM) 

67.3 

64.9 

85.3 

84.9 

80.1 

66.9 

74.8 

8.7 

Table 2. Increments of the displacement and contractile force of the cardiomyocytes on the 
grooved microcantilever 

A grooved cantilever was expected to bend much more than a surface flat cantilever upon a 
small force structurally, as shown in Figure 4. As expected, from the result of the simulation, 

Biohybrid Walking Microrobot with Self-assembled Cardiomyocytes 

359 

it was confirmed that a grooved cantilever could bend more than a surface flat cantilever as 
shown in Table 2. Based on measured displacement and analytical calculation or FEM 
modeling, shear forces on the microcantilevers were calculated. Table 1 shows the 
increments of the displacement and contractile force of the cardiomyocytes on the grooved 
microcantilever compared with those of the flat microcantilever. To compare the contractile 
forces of cardiomyocytes on the grooved microcantilever with that on the flat one, the 
structural difference of two microcantilevers had to be considered. 

Synthetically considering the above two factors, to yield the same amount of bending 
displacement by the two types of microcantilevers, the grooved microcantilever needed 
34.8% higher contractile force than that of the flat microcantilever. Similarly, according to 
FEM analysis, the flat microcantilever yielded 32.8% more bending displacement to the 
same value of shear force than the grooved microcantilever. Nevertheless, the 
cardiomyocytes cultivated on the grooved microcantilever gave a 25-40% increase in 
bending displacement from the percentage increase in bending displacment on the flat 
microcantilever. The contractile force of the aligned cardiomyocytes on the grooved 
cantilever yielded a 67-88% increase in displacement, which is higher than the percentage 
increase of displacement of the cardiomyocyte on the flat cantilever. The result of FEM 
analysis, 65-85% increase in displacement, was similar to the analytical solution above. The 
contractility of the cardiomyocytes on the grooved microcantilever was much higher than 
that on the flat microcantilever. Previously, many researchers developed microtechnology 
methods to measure the contractile force of cardiomyocytes (Lin et al., 2000; Tan et al., 2003; 
Zhao and Zhang, 2005; Balaban et al., 2001). The stress was found to vary between 2 and 5 
nN/mm 2 . The variation of stress from the cardiomyocytes, reported in the range from 2 to 5 
nN/mm 2 , was verified using our flat microcantilever (Park et al., 2005). Also, in this paper, 
it was identified that the stress variation of cardiomyocytes concentrated on the grooved 
surface increased 4-10 nN/mm2 and the average contraction increased 65-85%. 

Fig. 5. Images of the flat and grooved microcantilevers: (a) Fabricated PDMS flat and 
grooved microcantilever, (b) ESEM image of the hybrid organic-inorganic flat and grooved 
microcantilevers, (c) and (d) still images from video recordings of the vertical motion of the 
200x1000 m hybrid biopolymer microcantilevers. 

360 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Figure 5(a) and (b) show the fabricated PDMS microcantilevers and cultured 
cardiomyocytes on the flat and grooved microcantilevers. After the cardiomyocytes were 
cultured, the initial deflection of the grooved microcantilevers became larger than that of the 
flat microcantilevers. Compared with the actin filament of the cardiomyocytes on the flat 
microcantilever, that on the grooved microcantilever was well organized with a higher 
order. Figure 5 (c) and (d) show still images from video recordings of the vertical motion of 
the 200x1000 m hybrid biopolymer microcantilevers. The vertical motion of the hybrid 
biopolymer microcantilevers clearly showed the difference of the bending displacement 
between the flat and grooved microcantilevers. With respect to the deflections, the 
displacement of the grooved microcantilevers was larger than that of the flat 
microcantilevers. Analytical calculation and FEM analysis with ANSYS (ANSYS, Inc.) were 
performed to quantify the contractility of cardiomyocytes based on these experimental 
results. For a more realistic simulation, cardiomyocytes was modeled as a material 
contracting in the longitudinal direction in contact with the PDMS structure, and thus the 
contractile force was modeled as a shear force exerted at the interfacial area between the 
cardiomyocytes and PDMS due to the longitudinal contraction of the cardiomyocytes. 
Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio of the PDMS and cardiomyocytes were assumed to be 
750 kPa and 0.49 [20], and 40 kPa [30] and 0.49 [31], respectively. Information on the height 
of the cells is essential for calibrating the focal pressure of the cardiomyocytes at an interface. 
In general, the thickness of the cells differs according to surface conditions. When cells are 
cultured on a flat surface, their height is approximately 5 mm [16,21]. However, the height 
of the cells on a grooved surface is approximately 10 mm [16]. 

3. Hybrid Biopolymer Microrobot 

3.1. Introduction of biopolymer microrobot 

A proposed micromachine was made of silicone elastomer polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) 
and self organized cardiomyocytes, which allow free motions in physiological liquids based 
on the increase of cell power in a 3D microenvironment. In order to fabricate a 3D 
environment in a robot body, specially designed 3D molding aligner was invented [32]. 

3.2. Fabrication 

3.2.1. Fabrication of molding master for 3D PDMS microrobot 

As the same fabrication method of microcantilever, the sandwich molding process was used 
to fabricate a 3D PDMS microrobot. Figure 6 illustrates fabrication results from the precise 
alignment-based sandwich micromolding process. The silicon master with two level 
photoresist structures (Figure 6 (a)) and the glass master (Figure 6 (b)) were fabricated 
successfully. Figure 6 (c) shows the instant of alignment of the top and bottom masters 
carried out by our 3D micromolding aligner. A fabricated complex 3D microstructure with 
top and bottom geometries is shown in Figure 6 (d) as an example. 

Biohybrid Walking Microrobot with Self-assembled Cardio myocytes 

361 

J *_ 

Hi 

1 

■« 

Epnar 

(c) (d) 

Fig. 6. Microrobot fabrication results using the sandwich micromolding process with precise 
alignment (a) Bottom silicon master, (b) Top glass master, (c) Alignment of top and bottom 
masters via a 3D-micromolding aligner, (d) the fabricated complex 3D PDMS structure. 

To primary culture cardiomyocytes on the manufactured microrobot device through the 
PDMS molding process, a pre-process is needed. First, the PDMS device detached from the 
molding master is washed in 70% ethanol to remove impure particles. It is then immersed in 
70% ethanol for an hour for sterilization. Then it is taken out, and dried for 30 minutes on 
the clean bench under UV light. The fresh PDMS surface is in hydrophobic condition and 
this prevents the adhesion of proteins and cells. Therefore, O2 plasma treatment was applied 
to increase adhesion forces between the PDMS surface and extracellular matrix. PDMS 
consists of repeating -OSi(CH3)2- chains. The chain of CH3 groups makes the surface of the 
PDMS hydrophobic. The surface can be changed to hydrophilic by exposure to O2 plasma 
for 5 min. Plasma enhances cell adhesion onto the PDMS by oxidizing the surface of the 
PDMS to silanol (Si-OH) [20,69]. Then, the device is coated by immersing it in the ECM 
(Extra Cellular Matrix: fibronectin) solution overnight and taken out. Then, it is dried on the 
clean bench under UV light for an hour. Then the device to culture the cell primarily is 
ready, as shown in Figure 20 (2). 

Then the cell is seeded on the device and 5 days later, the device is detached at the bottom 
and cut the hinge on the device. Then, the robot device can move freely. Just before 
observing through an optical microscope, turn over the device by pipetting and look at the 
walking motion of the microrobot. 

362 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

3.3. Experiment 

3.3.1. Monitoring of Walking Motion of Microrobot 

To observe the vertical motion of the biomimetic microstructure, a CCD camera microscope 
(CCD CAM scope, SomeTech Vision) was used. Then, the motion of a biomimetic 
micromachine was measured using an inverted microscope (Olympus IX 81, Olympus) and 
captured by a digital camcorder (DCR-PC350, Sony Corp., Japan), as shown in Figure 20 (8). 
The captured movies were transferred into digital movie files at 30 frames/ sec, and then we 
analyzed the walking motion of the biomimetic micromachine using sequential video 
frames. 

Os. 
500 gm 

2 E 

. Br 

500 gm 

4c . 120 um 

* 

500 gm 
6 s. 

* ___ _ ^ 
500 gm 

* 
t 

* 

Ob. 

\ ■ '. V 

500 gm 

2 s. 

500 gm 

4 E 595 |jm 

1 
500 gm 

t 

L ■ 

V 

1 

\ 

6 b. 

« 

5 

■ 

(a) (b) 

Fig. 7. Sequential images for the movement of biomimetic micromachine 
(a) flat surface cantilever type legs, (b) groove surface cantilever type legs 

The biomimetic micromachine is designed and fabricated to achieve walking movement. 
The micromachine has asymmetric structure, which has 3 front and 3 rear legs of different 

Biohybrid Walking Microrobot with Self-assembled Cardiomyocytes 

363 

length. To mimic the legs of the ephyra and to realize a stable and simple structure, multiple 
legs are considered and all the legs are connected to the middle of the robot body to 
synchronize with the cardiomyocytes. For the forward movement of the microrobot, the legs 
are aligned in the horizontal direction and the front legs are made to be shorter than the rear 
legs. To concentrate the cardiomyocyte cell force, groove patterns are engraved on the 
surface of the legs. After about 72 to 96 h of culture, cardiomyocytes began to beat 
synchronously and all legs shows vertical displacement owing to the contractile force of the 
cardiomyocytes. Finally, the biomimetic micromachine activated by the contractile force of 
the cardiomyocytes begins to move, as shown in in Figure 7. Figure 7 (a) and (b) show the 
movement of the micromachine with flat surface cantilever type legs and groove surface 
ones, respectively. In case of the micromachine with the flat surface cantilever type legs, the 
cardiomyocytes on the surface on legs show synchronous beating, but the microrobot 
appears to show only a small advancement. However, the micromachine with groove 
surface shows forward movement. The average beating frequency was 1.4 Hz and its 
average step stroke was 100 |um, and thus, the calculated speed was about 140 lum-s- 1 . 

Fig. 8. Still images showing the sequential movement of the micromachine during one step 
(a) Before contraction of the leg (b) During contraction of the leg (c) After relaxation of the 
leg. Blue, green and red lines represent the edges of the vertical image of the micromachine 
at (a), (b) and (c) state, respectively. 

364 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

However, the average speed of the biohybrid micromachine was measured to be about 
125 um-s- 1 . The difference between the calculated speed and the average speed will be 
explained with respect to the walking mechanism of the micromachine. 
For forward movement, it is important that friction, related to the surface area of contact, be 
adjusted so that the microdevices can maximally use its muscle power [11]. The proposed 
micromachine has 3 front legs and 3 rear legs of different lengths. By the contractile force of 
the cardiomyocytes, cultured on the micromachine, the deflection of the rear legs of longer 
length is much larger than that of the front legs. At the end of the legs in contact with the 
substrate, the asymmetric design of the micromachine produces the difference of the surface 
area of contact and thus causes an imbalance of the friction force between the legs and the 
substrate. Therefore, the micromachine can move in the direction of the front legs of shorter 
length. The sequential video images of Figure 8 show the walking motion of the biomimetic 
micromachine during one step. 

4. Measurement and Discussion 
4.1 Long-term Monitoring of Microrobot 

4.1.1. Experimental setup 

In a hybrid device, the compatibility between the organic and inorganic materials is the 
most important parameter. Therefore, the cells on the structure were monitored for a long 
time and checked to determine if the proposed method was biocompatible and feasible. 
Although the cardiomyocytes started beating when they started to aggregate, but they was 
monitored from the 5th day when force was gathered by their synchronization. 

40 -| 

35- 

30- 

§,25- 
<D 

-a 
^20- 

ro 

15- 
10- 

5 

•-■' 

- Temperature compensation 
Without comptensation 

Time (min) 

Fig. 9. Comparison of temperature variation between temperature compensation and 
temperature without compensation 

To observe the hybrid device, the temperature change of the solution in the dish taken out 
from the incubator oven was checked. The graph in figure 9 shows the temperature change 
of the culture solution in the Petri dish filled with the cardiomyocytes when the 
cardiomyocyte cultured Petri dish was taken out from an incubator oven, and the 
temperature change was checked with an inverted microscope. When there is no 

Biohybrid Walking Microrobot with Self-assembled Cardio myocytes 

365 

temperature compensation, the inner temperature of the bioFAB is 25°. Because of the 
sudden drop in temperature, cells seemed to have been damaged. Therefore, temperature 
compensation was tried using a light bulb, and an experiment condition which could 
conserve the constant temperature was set up. 

Light bulb 

Temperature 
sensor 

Fig. 10. Experimental setup to compensate the temperature 

Figure 10 shows the experimental setup of temperature compensation using a light bulb and 
the setup measuring temperature by inserting a sensor in the Petri dish. The AD converted 
value of the voltage corresponding to the change of the resistance value in the thermostat 
was converted to temperature by interfacing. 

4.2. Frequency and Displacement vs. Force 

4.2.1. Frequency vs. Bending displacement 

The beating frequency and the displacement of the structure due to the contractile force of 
the cardiomyocytes were measured from the 5th day. As shown in Figure 11 (a), frequency 
became slower with time. Bending displacement increased, and on the 10th day, it was 
biggest, as shown in Figure 11 (b). 

I 

>"> 1 2 

LL 

S> no 

— ■ Robotl 

— • Robot2 

Robot3 
— t— Robot4 

\ T 

Monitoring Time (Day) 

(a) 

366 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

■ AVG 
• Max 
A Min 

Monitoring Time (Day) 

(b) 

Fig. 11. Long-term monitoring results of the cardiomyocytes activity on the polymer 
structure (a) Beating frequency of the cardiomyocytes according to the number of days (b) 
Average frequency of the cardiomyocytes according to the number of days 

■ Robotl 

• Robot2 

-a- Robot3 

— ▼— Robot4 

Monitoring Time (Day) 

(a) 

(a) 

-■-AVG 

200^ 

• Max 
A Min 

180- 

160- 

1. 140- 

<5 120- 
E 

I 10 °- 
"5. 

5 80 " 

i 5 60- 

%r^ 

^ 

HH 

| 40 " 

K 

20- 

0- 

Monitoring Time (Day) 

(b) 

Fig. 12. Long-term monitoring results of the cardiomyocytes activity on the polymer 
structure (a) Step increment of the microrobot legs according to the number of days (b) 
Average step increment of the microrobot legs according to the number of days 

Biohybrid Walking Microrobot with Self-assembled Cardiomyocytes 367 

Actually, the whole distance walked by the walking robot could not be measured, but when 
you multiply the frequency per day by the step increment, you can obtain the velocity per 
day. And when you multiply this result by time again, you can obtain the movement 
distance per day. So, by calculation, the total movement distance of the micro robot for 7 
days is expected to be more than 50 meters. 

As shown in the above experimental result, cardiomyocytes primary cultured on the 
polymer fabricated structure was checked to see if they were beating normally and 
operating well as an actuator. From this, it was found that PDMS used as the backbone of 
the hybrid device was biocompatible, and that the plasma treatment and extra cellular 
matrix coating used to increase the adhesion with cells made a stable and healthy 
environment for the cells to live. Therefore, a long-term actuator was found to be successful 
because it operated for over 10 days as an organic/ inorganic hybrid actuator. Even though 
the beating frequency became slower, contractile force became stronger. Also, the 
microrobot constantly moved for 7 days and showed that it could move an incredibly long 
distance. 

5. Conclusion 

By growing rat muscle tissues on a polymer backbone, we demonstrated the movement of 
the cell powered microrobot. From the viewpoint of a walking microrobot driven by muscle, 
the cell powered microrobot has novel originality and great significance in the robotics field. 
The proposed microrobot has the following characteristics: (1) the self-assembled hybrid 
microrobot consists of biotic muscle cells and PDMS backbone, which is well-known as a 
biocompatible material. (2) The surface of PDMS backbone is engineered into a groove 
pattern, which promotes higher order cell concentration and realizes higher generative force 
of the muscle cells than a 2D culture surface. (3) PDMS is easily fabricated by the? a? 
micromolding procedure and thus high throughput and mass-production of the cell 
powered microrobot become possible. (4) The long term monitoring result of the primary 
cultured cardiomyocytes on engineered surfaces is firstly reported and analyzed. 
Consequently, the walking robot showed reliable and long-term actuation performances. 
During the organization of the cardiomyocyte-PDMS hybrid microrobot, the groove surface 
provided an adverse environment in the initial stages of cell attachment and at adaptation to 
the surfaces by the modifications in the specific gene expression of the isoforms of troponin 
and connexin. However, once the cells settled down, more vigorous and synchronous 
propelling forces were generated through the tighter cell-cell contacts, intracellular 
arrangements of vesicles and cytoskeltons and higher stimuli according to the 
microenvironment on the groove surfaces. 

As quantitative results, the stress of 2-5 nN/ |um 2 was calculated, which was induced on the 
flat surface of the microcantilever by the contractile force of the cardiomyocytes. Then, the 
force of the cardiomyocytes cultured on the groove surface microcantilever increased up to 
60% higher than that on the flat surface cantilever. Finally, the forward movement of the 
micro-robot with the groove surface was monitored, and the measured speed was about 140 
um-s- 1 . 

368 Climbing and Walking Robots 

6. References 

[I] Hiroyuki Fujita, (1998). Microactuators and micromachines, Proceedings of the IEEE, v.86 

no. 8, pp. 1721-1732 
[2] Friedrich, C.R.; Fang, J.; Warrington, R.O. (1997). Micromechatronics and the 

miniaturization of structures, devices, and systems, IEEE transactions on 

components, packaging, and manufacturing technology Part C, Manufacturing, v. 

20 no. 1, pp. 31-38 
[3] Bar-Cohen, Y., (2006). Biomimetics: biologically inspired technologies, Second Edition 

(SPIE Press Monograph) Vol. PM136 
[4] Ho, D.; Chu, B.; Schmidt, J.J.; Brooks, E.K.; Montemagno, CD. (2004). Hybrid protein- 
polymer biomimetic membranes , IEEE Trans. Nanotech. 3, pp. 256-263 
[5] Neves, H.P.; Schmidt, J.J.; Soong, R.K.; Montemagno, CD., (2002). Hybrid micro-and 

nanobiomechanical systems: a control perspective, World Automation Congr. Proc. 

5th Biannual, pp 275-279 
[6] Spatz, J. P. (2005). Bio-MEMS: Building up micromuscles, Nature Mater. 4, pp. 115-116 
[7] Soong, R. K.; Bachand, G. D.; Neves, H. P.; Olkhovets, A.G.; Graighead, H. G.; and 

Montemagno, C D. (2000). Powering an inorganic nanodevice with a biomolecular 

motor, Science 290, pp. 1555-1558 
[8] Rondelez, Y.; Tresset, G.; Nakashima, T.; Kato-Yamada, Y.; Fujita, H.; Takeuchi, S.; and 

Noji, H. (2005). Highly coupled ATP synthesis by Fl-ATPase single molecules, 

Nature, 433, pp. 773 
[9] Weibel, D. B.; Garstecki, P.; Ryan, D.; DiLuzio, W. R.; Mayer, M.; Seto, J. E. and 

Whitesides, G. M. (2005). Microoxen: Microorganisms to move microscale loads, 

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 102, pp. 11963-11967 
[10] Neves, H.P., Schmidt, J.J., Soong, R.K., Montemagno, CD., World Automation 

Congress, 2002. Proceedings of the 5th Biannual, v.14, pp.275-279 (2002). 

[II] Xi, J.; Schmidt J. J. and Montemagno, C D. (2005). Self-assembled microdevices driven 

by muscle, Nat. Mater., 4, 180 
[12] Tanaka, Y.; Morishima, K.; Shimizu, T.; Kikuchi, A.; Yamato, M.; Okano, T.; and 

Kitamori, T. (2006). Demonstration of a PDMS-based bio-microactuator using 

cultured cardiomyocytes to drive, Lab on a chip. 6, pp. 362-368 
[13] Fisher, M. E. & Kolomeisky, A. B. (1999). The force exerted by a molecular motor, Proc. 

Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 96, pp. 6597 
[14] Entcheva, E. & H. Bien. (2003). Tension development and nuclear eccentricity in 

topographically controlled cardiac, Biomed. Microdevices. 5: pp. 163-168, 
[15] Motlagh, D.; Hatman, T.; Desai, T & Russell, B. J (2003).Microfabricated grooves 

recapitulate neonatal myocyte connexin43 and N-cadherin, Biomed Mater Res A. 

67, pp. 148-57 
[16] Motlagh, D.; Senyo, S. E.; Desai, T and Russell, B. (2003).Microtextured substrata alter 

gene expression, protein localization and the shape of cardiac, Biomaterials, 24, pp. 

2463-2476 
[17] Dalby, M. J.; M. O. Riehle; S. J. Yarwood; C D. W. Wilkinson and A. S. G. Curtis. (2003). 

Nucleus alignment and cell signaling in fibroblasts: response to a micro-grooved 

topography, Exper. Cell. Res. 284: pp. 274-282 

Biohybrid Walking Microrobot with Self-assembled Cardiomyocytes 369 

[18] Yin, L.; Bien, H. and Entcheva, E. (2004). Scaffold topography alters intracellular 

calcium dynamics in cultured cardiomyocyte, Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 287, 

H pp. 1276-1285 
[19] Armani, D.; Liu, C; Aluru, N. (1999). Re-configurable fluid circuits by PDMS elastomer 

micromachining, IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems; Orlando, FL, U.S.A. pp 

222-227 
[20] Park J Y; Ryu J; Choi S K; Seo E; Cha J M; Ryu S; Kim J; Kim B and Lee S H. (2005). Real- 
time measurement of the contractile forces of self-organized cardiomyocytes on 

hybrid, Anal. Chem. 77, pp. 6571-6580 
[21] Sia, S.; Whitesides, G. (2003). Microfluidic devices fabricated in poly (dimethylsiloxane) 

for biological studies, Electrophoresis, 24, pp. 3563-3576 
[22] B. H. Jo; L. M. Van Lerberghe; K. M. Motsegood and David J. Beebe (2000). Three- 
dimensional micro-channel fabrication in polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) elastomer, 

J. Microelectromech. Syst., 9(1), 76-81. 
[23] Y. Xia & G. Whitesides Replica molding with a polysiloxane mold provides this 

patterned microstructure, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, pp. 550-575. 
[24] M. Zile, et. al., (1998). Constitutive properties of adult mammalian cardiac muscle cells, 

Circulation, vol. 98, pp. 567-579 
[25] M. Kawai; Y. Saeki; Y. Zhao (1993).Crossbridge scheme and the kinetic constants of 

elementary steps deduced from chemically, Circulation research: J. American Heart 

Association, vol. 73, pp. 35-50 
[26] K. P. Roos (1997). The Myocardium, 2nd ed. G.A. Langer, editor, Academic, New York. 

pp. 235-323 
[27] G. Lin; R. Palmer; K. Pister, and P. Roos (2000). Surface micromachined poly silicon 

heart cell force transducer, IEEE Trans. J. Biomedical Engineering, vol. 48, pp. 996- 

1006 
[28] Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, pp. 834-837 (2005). 
[29] S. Sia; G. Whitesides (2003). Microfluidic devices fabricated in poly (dimethylsiloxane) 

for biological studies, Electrophoresis, vol. 24, pp. 3563-3576 
[30] Schmidt, J. J.; Montemagno, CD. (2004). Bionanomechanical systems, Annual Review of 

Materials Research 34, pp. 315-337. 
[31] Janz, R.F.; Grimm, A.F., (1972). Finite-element model for the mechanical behaviour of 

the left ventricle: prediction of deformation in the potassium-arrested rat heart, 

Circular Research 30, 244-252. 
[32] Park, J.; Kim, J.; Roh, D.; Park, S.; Kim, B.; Chun, K. (2006). Fabrication of 3D thin 

polymer structures for hybrid sensors and actuators, Journal of Micromechanics 

and Microengineering 16, 1614-1619. 

370 Climbing and Walking Robots 

22 

Theoretical and Experimental Study 
for Queueing System with Walking Distance 

Daichi Yanagisawa 1,2 , Yushi Suma 1 , Akiyasu Tomoeda 3,4 , 

Ayako Kimura 5 , Kazumichi Ohtsuka 4 , and Katsuhiro Nishinari 4,6 

1 Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, School of Engineering, 

The University of Tokyo. 

^Research Fellow of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science. 

3 Meiji Institute for Advanced Study of Mathematical Sciences, Meiji University. 

^Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo. 

5 Mitsubishi Research Institute, Inc. 
6 PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency. 

Japan 

1. Introduction 

Queueing theory has been considerably studied since Erlang started designing telephone ex- 
changing system in 1909 Erlang (1909), and many important theories have been developed 
Burke (1956); Jackson (1957); Kendall (1953); Little (1961). Nowadays, it is applied to study 
many social systems such as the internet Kasahara (2002); Mukherjee & Manna (2005), a re- 
source management system Barabasi (2005), a vehicular traffic system Helbing et al. (2006) 
and a pedestrian traffic system D. Helbing & Treiber (2005). 

Traffic flow and pedestrian dynamics have been studied actively by using the theory of parti- 
cle systems, fluid dynamics and cellular automaton Chowdhury et al. (2000); Helbing (2001). 
Especially, we simulate the dynamics of cars and pedestrians efficiently by using cellular au- 
tomaton models since its time and space are both discrete. Pedestrians 7 movement is treated 
as a stochastic process in the floor field model Nishinari et al. (2004), which is a cellular au- 
tomaton model for pedestrian dynamics. Then we have succeeded in calculating the total 
evacuation time analytically by using the floor field model, and studied the way of smooth 
evacuation Yanagisawa et al. (2009); Yanagisawa & Nishinari (2007). 

Calculating the mean waiting time in the queueing system, whose bottleneck is a service win- 
dow is similar to calculating the total evacuation time from a room, whose bottleneck is an 
exit. However, the former does not take into account of the effect of spatial structures, while 
the latter does. 

According to the queueing theory, the waiting time of a fork-type queueing system is shorter 
than that of a parallel-type queueing system (Parallel) (Fig. 1 (a)). However, fork- type queue- 
ing system considered in the normal queueing theory (N-Fork) (Fig. 1 (b)) does not reflect the 
effect of the walking distances from the head of the queue to the service windows. The effect 
of the distances cannot be ignored in a system such as a large immigration inspection floor in 
an international airport since walking distances become very long. 

372 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

service t 
windows JL 

-4 + 

t 

t 

Xls 

t 

t 

Xls 

t 

t 

Xls 

ju ju ju /u 
t t t ! 

T T T T 

* 

T T T T T T 

* 

TTTTTT 

t 

Xls 

t 

X 

(a) Parallel (M/M/l x s ) (b) N-Fork (M/M/s) 

Fig. 1. Schematic views of queueing systems in the case s = 4. (a) Parallel (M/M/l x 4). (b) 
N-Fork (M/M/4). An ideal fork-type queueing system. A person at the head of the queue 
moves to the service window instantaneously when one of them becomes vacant. 

Therefore, we have combined the queueing theory and the floor field model, and introduced 
the effect of delay in walking from the head of the queue to the service windows in the queue- 
ing theory. Suitable type of queueing system under various conditions is obtained by ana- 
lyzing the new queueing theory. When there are plural service windows, the queueing the- 
ory indicates that a fork-type queueing system, which collects people into a single queue, is 
more efficient than a parallel-type queueing system, i.e., queues for each service windows. 
However, in our walking-distance introduced queueing theory, we find that the parallel-type 
queueing system is more efficient when sufficiently many people are waiting in the queues, 
and service time is shorter than walking time. Since the model is studied not only by sim- 
ulation, but also by theoretical analysis, we have succeeded to obtain the diagram, which 
indicates the suitable type of queueing system according to the designing conditions. 
In the fork-type queueing system, people at the head of the queue starts to move only when 
one of the service windows become vacant. Since this walking time reduces the efficiency, we 
consider two new methods for improving the efficiency of the queueing systems. First, we set 
the head of the queue at the center of the system to decrease the effect of walking distance. 
This transformation of the system decreases the walking distance to the service windows for 
pedestrians. Second, we have proposed to keep one person waiting at each service window 
when it is occupied by other person. Then the waiting person can instantaneously receive 
service at the window after the former person leave there. 

In addition to the theoretical analysis, the experiments of the queueing system for people have 
been performed. We have verified that the mean waiting time of the parallel-type queue- 
ing system become smaller than that of fork-type in the congested situation, experimentally. 
When we have kept one person waiting at each window, the mean waiting time has dra- 

Theoretical and Experimental Study for Queueing System with Walking Distance 373 

matically decreased, i.e., the efficiency has improved, as we have expected from theoretical 

calculation. 

Finally, we consider the situation where there are two kinds of people, whose service time is 

short and long. The analytical result says that we can decrease people's waiting time and their 

stress by setting up queues for each kind of people separately. 

2. Walking-Distance introduced Queueing Theory 

2.1 Distance introduced Fork-type Queueing System: D-Fork 

In a parallel-type queueing system (Parallel) (Fig. 1 (a)), people wait just behind the former 
person, so that there is no delay in walking. While, in a fork-type queueing system, people 
take some time to walk from the head of the queue to the service windows. However, the 
walking time is not taken into account in a fork-type queueing system in the normal queue- 
ing theory (N-Fork) (Fig. 1 (b)), and people move from the head of the queue to the service 
windows instantaneously. Therefore, we consider D-Fork as in Fig. 2 by representing the 
walking distance using cellular automaton. The gray cells are window cells, and the numbers 
described in there are window numbers. The white cells are passage cells. Note that the letter 
"C" described in the passage cells represents the common passage cells. For example, both per- 
sons who are going to the window 3 and 4 pass the common passage cells. People sometimes 
cannot go forward in the common passage cells since there is a possibility that other people 
stand in front of them. The place that people are waiting, which is not divided into cells, is a 
queue, s e N, A <G [0, oo), and u <G [0, oo) represent the number of service windows, the arrival 
rate, and the service rate, respectively, a and b represent the length of the passage, and k is 
the interval length between two service windows. The distance from the head of the queue 
to the service window n e [l,s] is described as d n = a + b + k(n — 1). Fig. 2 represents the 
case s = 4, a = 2, b = 2, and k = 2. Service windows have two states: vacant and occupied. 
When a person at the head of the queue decides to move to the vacant service window n, it 
changes into occupied state. The person proceed to the service window by one cell with the 
rate p G [0, oo) as the asymmetric simple exclusion process. A service starts when the person 
arrives at the service window, and after it finishes the state of the service window changes 
into vacant state. 

2.2 Update Rules 

The simulation of walking-distance introduced queueing systems consists of the following 
five steps per unit time step. 

1. If there is at least one vacant service window and one person in the queue, and the first 
cell of the passage is vacant, then the person decide to proceed to a vacant service win- 
dow which is the nearest to the head of the queue, and the state of the service window 
become occupied. 

2. Add one person to the queue with the probability AAt, where At is the length of the unit 
time step. 

3. Proceed each person in the passage cells to his/her service windows with the probabil- 
ity pAt if there is not other person at their proceeding cell. 

4. Remove people at the service windows and change their states into vacant state with 
the probability jiAt. 

5. If 1. takes into practice, proceed the person at the head of the queue to the first passage 
cell with the probability pAt. 

374 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

b=l 

1 

t 

* 2 

3 

p \ 

t 
* 4 

service windows 

n — 1 

C 

c 

C 

c 

¥ 

passage cells 

U — L 

AC 

w 

'fr'fr'fr'fr'fr'fr'fr 

* 

queue 

w \ \ \ w 

u 

D-Fork 

Fig. 2. Schematic view of D-Fork (s = 4). 

2.3 Stationary Equations 

We define the sum of the walking time and the service time at service window n as a through- 
put time r n and its reciprocal as a throughput rate \i n . Here, we calculate the mean throughput 
rate fi n when n service windows are occupied, and obtain stationary equations of D-Fork. We 
suppose that all passage cells are vacant by mean field approximation. Then, the mean value 
of the throughput time E(r n ) is described as follows. 

The throughput rate ]i n is obtained as 

1 1 

E(r n ) l i a±b j fc(n-i) l + a + 2 j 6(n-l) / 
HP p 

where 

]i(a + b) 

¥> 

k}i 

V ' 2 P 

In the case 2/3(n — l)/(l + a) <C 1, we calculate the mean throughput rate fl n as 

a) 

(2) 

(3) 

fin 

Eft 

l + a + |6(n-l)" 

(4) 

Theoretical and Experimental Study for Queueing System with Walking Distance 

375 

200 r 

^ 100 

(a) s=3, £=0.05 

— — Parallel(Theo.) 

N-Fork (Theo.) 

D-Fork(Theo.) 

Parallel(Sim.) 
N-Fork(Sim.) 
D-Fork(Sim.) 

x 

n 

A 

0.0 

fnl^Wryy fifttOA 

0.4 

, 

(b) s=4\ \ 

Parallel 

0.3 

- 

QQ, 0.2 

\ 

0.1 

D-Fork(s=2)x2^ 
D-Fork 

V \ 

0.0 

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

p=X/(Sfi) 

0.2 0.4 0.6 

p=A/(s/i) 

Fig. 3. (a) Comparison of Wq of Parallel, N-Fork, and D-Fork in the case a = 1, b = 1, p = 
1, oc = 0, ft = 0.05, ]i = 0.05. (b) A queueing system which makes the mean waiting time Wq 
minimum in the case s = 4. 

By using (4) the stationary equations are described as follows: 

AP 

AP n _i + (n + l)/* n+ iP w+ i 

AP n _! + sfl s P n+1 

(A + nfi n )P n 
(A + sp s )P n 

(1 <n<s-l) 
(n > s). 

(5) 

We obtain the mean waiting time Wq by solving (5) analytically. In the case oc = ft = 0, we 
have the stationary equations of M/ M/s Bolch et al. (1998) from (5), thus oc and /3 represent 
the effect of walking time. 

In our simulation the distribution of the throughput time is gamma distribution. We approx- 
imate it as exponential distribution in this calculation, however, when ft is small the results 
from the exponential distribution approximated well to those from gamma distribution. 

3. Comparison of a Parallel Queue and a Fork Queue 

We compare the mean waiting time Wq of Parallel (Fig. 1 (a)), N-Fork (Fig. 1 (b)), and D-Fork 
(Fig. 2 (a)). Figure 3 (a) show Wq against the utilization p(= A/(sf/)). The results of analysis 
agree with those of the simulation very well. We see that Wq of N-Fork is smaller than that 
of Parallel and D-Fork in < p < 1. There is a possibility that more than one person is 
waiting in one queue and no one is in the other queue in Parallel (s > 2), however there is no 
vacant service window in N-Fork when people are waiting in the system. This is the reason 
why Wq of N-Fork is always smaller than that of Parallel. Since N-Fork does not take into 
account of the effect of the walking distances, i.e. ft = 0, it is obvious that Wq of N-Fork is 
smaller than that of D-Fork. The N-Fork is the most efficient of the three; however, it is an 
ideal system and does not exist in reality. By focusing on the curves of Parallel and D-Fork, 
we can clearly observe the crossing of them. This means that when the utilization p is small, 
i.e., there are not sufficiently many people in the system; we should form D-Fork to decrease 
the waiting time. On the contrary, when the utilization p is large, i.e., there are many people 
in the system, we should form Parallel. When ft become large, the crossing point move to 

376 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

b = 2 

a = 2 

t 

t 

1 

* 

3 

p \ 

<fr 4 

c 

c 

* c 

p ± 

W 

'fr'fr'fr'fr'fr 

IHU'HUHHHH' 

u 

(a) D-Fork-Center 

! 

t 

-fr 1 

w 

* 2 

* 3 

c 

c 

C 

c 

+ c 

P\ c 

\*-2' 

+♦♦♦♦♦♦♦ 

♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦ 

u 

(b) D-Fork-Wait 

Fig. 4. Schematic views of walking-distance introduced queueing systems (s = 4). (a) D-Fork- 
Center. The head of the queue is at the center of the system, (b) D-Fork-Wait. People can wait 
at the cells, which are described as "W". 

the left. The strong effect of the walking distances extend the suitable p region for Parallel. 
This agrees with our intuition, since D-Fork is influenced by the distances but Parallel does 
not. The reversal phenomenon of Wq is obtained for the first time by introducing the effect of 
distance. 

Figure 3 (b) shows the type of queueing system, which minimize Wq against p and ]8 in the 
case s = 4. This figure is useful for designing queueing systems. The curves divide the p — fi 
plane into three regions. In the lower left region Wq of D-Fork (s = 4) is the smallest, and in 
the upper right region Wq of Parallel is the smallest. Surprisingly, Wq of D-Fork (s = 2) x 2 
(Fig. 2 (b)) is the smallest in the middle region. This indicates that the choice of the type of 
queueing systems is not only Parallel and D-Fork, but also a combination of them. According 
to (3), j6 represents the ratio of walking time and service time. Therefore, D-Fork is suitable 
when service time is much longer than walking time. The value of /3 is small in most D-Fork 
in reality, however, in large queueing system such as an immigration inspection floor in the 
international airport, we should divide the large D-Fork into the several small D-Forks to 
decrease the effect of the walking distances. 

4. Methods for Shortening Waiting Time in D-Fork 

4.1 Set the Head of the Queue at the Center: D-Fork-Center 

The head of the queue is usually set at the end of the system since we can efficiently use the 
space for the queue. However, people have to walk a long distance to the farthest window as 
in Fig. 2. Thus, we propose to set the head of the queue at the center (D-Fork-Center) as in 
Fig. 4 (a). Then, the mean throughput rate is described as follows: 

}hi 

1 + CC + 

(«+ 1± ^) 

(6) 

Theoretical and Experimental Study for Queueing System with Walking Distance 

377 

100 

0.4 0.6 0.8 

p=X/(Sfi) 

Fig. 5. Comparison of the mean waiting time Wq among D-Fork, D-Fork-Center, and D-Fork- 
Wait in the case s = 4, oc = 0.15, j8 = 0.05, ]i = 0.05. 

Comparing (4) and (6), we see that the coefficient of n in (6) is half of that in (4). Therefore, 
the effect of the walking distance approximately becomes half if we set the head of the queue 
at the center. The mean waiting time is approximately calculated by replacing /3 of D-Fork 
with j6/2 in Sec. 4.3. Note, that the (6) represents the fi n in the case that both s and k are even 
number. The mathematical formulation of the other cases are described in Ref. Yanagisawa 
etal. (2008). 

4.2 Keep One Person Waiting at the Window: D-Fork-Wait 

The walking distance in D-Fork is essentially problematic, since it delays the start of services, 
i.e., people have to walk the passage before they start to receive the service. Thus, we propose 
to keep one person waiting at the service window. We call a queueing system which this 
method is applied to as D-Fork- Wait (Fig. 4 (b)). Since people are waiting just next to the 
service windows, they can receive service instantaneously when their former people leave 
there. The delay in walking is almost removed by this method, i.e., the effect of walking 
distance does not need to be considered. Therefore, the mean waiting time is approximately 
calculated by the expression for N-Fork. 

4.3 Approximated Calculation and Simulation 

Figure 5 show the mean waiting time Wq in D-Fork, D-Fork-Center, and D-Fork- Wait. We see 
that Wq in D-Fork-Center is always smaller than that in D-Fork in < p < 1. This result 
verifies that we can decrease Wq by setting the head of the queue at the center. We also find 
that Wq in D-Fork-Wait is the smallest of the three since it almost completely removes the 
effect of walking time by keep one person waiting at the window. The well correspondence 
between the results of the theoretical analysis and simulation in p < 0.85 also verifies our 
assumption that D-Fork- Wait becomes close to N-Fork. However, in the large-p region, the 
result of the simulation becomes larger than that of the theoretical analysis. In D-Fork- Wait, 
there is a possibility that 2s people are in the window cells or passage cells, while s people 
is the maximum in the other cases. Thus, when p is large, people in the common passage 
cells cannot often proceed since other people are in front of them. This jam in the common 

378 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

(a) 

Parallel D-Fork 

D-Fork 
Wait 

(b) 

Fig. 6. (a) Schematic view of the experiment, (b) The experimental mean waiting time for 
Parallel, D-Fork, and D-Fork- Wait. 

passage cells, which is not considered in the theoretical calculation, increase the waiting time 
in D-Fork- Wait when p is large. 

5. Experiments 

We have performed the experiments to examine the two results in the former section. 1. 
There is a case that Wq in Parallel becomes smaller than that in D-Fork. 2. We can de- 
crease Wq by keeping one person waiting at the window. We made the queueing system 
as in Fig. 1 (a), 2, and 4 (b), whose parameters are s = 4, a = 1 [m], b = 0.5 [m], k = 3 [m], 
A = 188/600 [persons /sec], and ]i = 1/8 [persons /sec]. Figure 6 (a) is the snap shot of the 
experiment. Participants of the experiments enter the system and line up in the queue when 
the staff says to do so. They proceed to the windows and receive service. After that they wait 
at the starting position until the staff let him/her enter the system again. We put 188 people 
in 600 [sec] in one experiment. Note, that the arrival was random while the service was deter- 
ministic for simplicity. According to the Pollaczek-Khintchine formula Bolch et al. (1998), Wq 
becomes small when the service is deterministic. Since this effect acts on the all kinds of the 
queueing systems in the same way, the results are not critically influenced by deterministic 
service. Therefore, we can examine the result of the theoretical analysis and simulations by 
these experiments. 

Figure 6 (b) shows the result of the experiments. We see that Wq in Parallel is smaller than that 
in D-Fork. This result verifies our theoretical analysis and simulation by using the walking- 
distance introduced queueing theory. The reversal of Wq between Parallel and D-Fork is ob- 
served experimentally for the first time in this paper. We also find that Wq becomes dra- 
matically small in D-Fork- Wait. This new result indicates that the method "Keep one person 
waiting" is an effective way to shorten the waiting time empirically. 

6. Simultaneous Arrival of Many People 

In the former sections, we discuss the queueing systems, whose distribution of interarrival 
time is exponential distribution, i.e. random arrival. Here, we consider the situation that many 
people arrive at the same time, such as arrivals of people who alight from trains and airplanes. 

Theoretical and Experimental Study for Queueing System with Walking Distance 

379 

Both kind of 
people are 
Welcome 

(a) (S-a) 
Mix (s=4) 

Long-People 
Only 

Short-People 
Only E=™ 

(b) (S-b) 

Long-People 
Only 

Short-People Only 

-> Long-People Only 
(c) (S-c) 

a 

Separate (s s =l, s L =3) Separate (s s =l, s L =3) -> Long (s L =4) 

Fig. 7. Schematic views of queueing systems, (a) (S-a) Mix queueing system (s = 4). (b) (S-b) 
Separate queueing system (sg = 1, Si =3). (c) (S-c) Separate queueing system (s$ = 1, Si = 
3) — > Queueing system for LP (si = 4). 

0.007 

0.006 

> 0.005 

£ 0.004 
(0 
■5 0.003 

o 

Q- 0.002 
0.001 
0.000 

(S- 

-a) Mix (s=4)x2 

(a) 

(S- 

-b) Sep. (Si 

=1.3* 

=3)x2 

: (S- 

-c) Sep.(s-| = 

=1,Sz= 

=3)x2^Long(s=4)x2; 

; 

// 

On 
\\ 

»s^ 

1200 
^total 

Fig. 8. (a) The probability distribution of the total throughput time T total- 3 ) Number of people 
in the queueing system against time step t. The value of plot S-b and S-c decrease dramatically, 
when people start to be given services. This is because SPs get out from the system quickly by 
avoiding the disturbance by LPs. 

The total throughput time T total tnat a ^ people finish leaving the system is calculated and 
studied to decrease it. We consider the system, which has four service windows. There are 
two kinds of people whose service time are short (SP) and long (LP). The service rate of SP and 
the number of service windows only for SP are denoted as jig an d s$, respectively. Similarly, 
those of LP are described as ]i^ and s^. We have three strategies as follows: 

(S-a) Mix (s = 4) (Fig. 7 (a)) 

Both SPs and LPs use the same windows. 

(S-b) Separate (s s = l,s L = 3) (Fig. 7 (b)) 

SPs use the window only for SP and LPs use the windows only for LP. 

(S-c) Separate (s s = 1, s L = 3) -► Long (s L = 4) (Fig. 7 (c)) 

First same as (b), but after all SPs have left, the window, which was only for SP, is open 
for LP. 

380 Climbing and Walking Robots 

The distribution of the T total when 50 SPs and 50 LPs arrive at the same time is described in 
Fig. 8 (a). We see that the mean of T total °f S-c is the smallest and that of S-b is the largest. 
When S-b or S-c is adopted, the queue of the SP is not affected by the distances. Thus SPs 
leave the system quickly. After all SPs have left, all four service windows are used efficiently 
in S-c, however, one window is not used in S-b. This makes S-c the best and S-b the worst. 
We also discuss the stress of waiting people by Fig. 8 (b), which describes the number of 
people waiting in the queue against the time step t. People suffer from a stress when they are 
waiting in the queue and do not when they leave the system. Therefore, an area surrounded 
by the axes and the curves represents the sum of all people's stress until they left. Clearly, 
we observe that (Area of S-c) < (Area of S-b) < (Area of S-a). It is interesting that when we 
compare T tota i, S-a is better than S-b, however, comparing the stress, the result is opposite. We 
also find that S-c is the best strategy from the both point of views: T total an d the stress. 
If the arrival of people is random, it is difficult to adopt S-c since we cannot find out when 
to change the type of the queueing system. However, if we have information about people's 
arrival, we can decrease both waiting time and stress of people by adapting the type of the 
queueing system into proper one. 

When we apply this study to the real system, the service rates are estimated by the data from 
the measurement. 

7. Conclusion 

We have introduced the effect of walking distance from the head of the queue to the service 
windows and shown that the performance of a parallel-type queueing system is better than 
that of a fork-type queueing system when there are sufficiently many people in the system. 
The effectiveness of the two new methods is also studied. The mean waiting time becomes 
small when we set the head of the queue at the center or keep one person waiting at each 
service window in a fork- type queueing system since the effect of walking distance decreases. 
It also turns out that dynamical change of a queueing system decrease both waiting time and 
stress of people when two kinds of people, whose service time are short and long, come into 
the system at the same time. 

We would like to emphasize that our study is based on the theoretical analysis, simulations, 
and experiments. Therefore, the results in this paper are reliable enough to apply to the queue- 
ing systems in the real world. It is an important future work to study the effect of the costs 
raised by the two methods. When we set the head of the queue at the center, the space for 
waiting people decreases, and at least one clerk is needed at the head of the queue to keep one 
person waiting at each window. 

Acknowledgement 

We thank Dai Nippon Printing Co., Ltd. in Japan for the assistance of the experiment, which 
is described in Sec. 5. This work is financially supported by Japan Society for the Promotion 
of Science and Japan Science and Technology Agency. 

8. References 

Barabasi, A.-L. (2005). The origin of bursts and heavy tails in human dynamics, Nature 

435:207-211. 
Bolch, G., Greiner, S., de Meer, H. & Trivedi, K. (1998). Queueing Networks and Markov Chains, 

A Wiley-Interscience Publication, U.S.A. 

Theoretical and Experimental Study for Queueing System with Walking Distance 381 

Burke, P. J. (1956). The output of a queueing system, Operations Research 4(6): 699-704. 

Chowdhury, D., Santen, L. & Schadschneider, A. (2000). Phys. Rep. 329: 199. 

D. Helbing, R. J. & Treiber, M. (2005). Analytical investigation of oscillations in intersecting 

flows of pedestrian and vehicle traffic, Phys. Rev. E 72: 046130. 
Erlang, A. K. (1909). The theory of probabilities and telephone conversations, Nyt. Tidsskr. 

Mat. Ser. B 20: 33-39. 
Helbing, D. (2001). Traffic and related self-driven many-particle systems, Rev. Mod. Phys. 

73:1067-1141. 
Helbing, D., Treiber, M. & Kesting, A. (2006). Understanding interarrival and interdeparture 

time statistics from interactions in queueing systems, Physica A 363: 62-72. 
Jackson, J. K. (1957). Networks of waiting lines, Operations Research 5(4): 518-521. 
Kasahara, S. (2002). Towards queueing theory for the internet design, TECHNICAL REPORT 

OF IEICE 101(649): 25-30. (in Japanese). 
Kendall, D. G. (1953). Stochastic processes occurring in the theory of queues and their analysis 

by the method of the imbedded markov chain, Ann. Math. Statist. 24(3): 338-354. 
Little, J. C. D. (1961). A proof for the queueing formula I = Aw, Operations Research 9(3): 383- 

387. 
Mukherjee, G. & Manna, S. S. (2005). Phase transition in a directed traffic flow network, Phys. 

Rev. E 71: 066108. 
Nishinari, K., Kirchner, A., Namazi, A., Schadschneider, A. & Nonmembers (2004). IEICE 

Trans. Inf. Syst. E87-D: 726. 
Yanagisawa, D., Kimura, A., Tomoeda, A., Nishi, R., Suma, Y, Ohtsuka, K. & Nishinari, K. 

(2009). Introduction of frictional and turning function for pedestrian outflow with an 

obstacle, Phys. Rev. E 80: 036110. 
Yanagisawa, D. & Nishinari, K. (2007). Mean-field theory for pedestrian outflow through an 

exit, Phys. Rev. E 76: 061117. 
Yanagisawa, D., Tomoeda, A., Kimura, A. & Nishinari, K. (2008). Analysis on queueing sys- 
tems by walking-distance introduced queueing theory, Journal of J SI AM 18(4): 507- 

534. (in Japanese). 

382 Climbing and Walking Robots 

23 

Intention-Based Walking Support for 
Paraplegia Patients with Robot Suit HAL 

Kenta Suzuki 1 , Gouji Mito 1 , Hiroaki Kawamoto 2 , 
Yasuhisa Hasegawa 1 and Yoshiyuki Sankai 1 

1 Graduate School of Systems and Information Engineering, University ofTsukuba 

2 Japan Association for the Advancement of Medical Equipment 

Tennodai 1-1-1, Tsukuba, 305-8573, Japan 

Email: cybernoid@golem.kz.tsukuba.ac.jp 

Abstract 

This paper proposes an algorithm to estimate human intentions related with walking in or- 
der to comfortably and safely support a paraplegia patient's walk. A robot suit "HAL" has 
been developed for an enhancement of healthy person's activities and for support of physi- 
cally challenged person's daily life. Assisting method based on bioelectrical signals such as 
myoelectricity successfully supports healthy person's walking. These bioelectrical signals, 
however, cannot be measured properly from a paraplegia patient. Therefore another inter- 
face that can estimate patients' intentions without any manual controller are desired for robot 
control since a manual controller deprives a patient of his/her hands' freedom. Estimation 
of patients' intentions contributes to support not only comfortably but also safely, because an 
inconformity between the robot suit motion and the patient motion results in his/her stum- 
bling or falling. The proposed algorithm, therefore, estimates patient's intentions from a floor 
reaction force reflecting patient's weight shift during walking and standing. The effectiveness 
of this algorithm is investigated through experiments on a paraplegia patient who has a sen- 
sory paralysis on both legs, especially his left leg. We show that HAL supports patient's walk 
properly, estimating his intentions based on floor reaction force. 
Keywords: robot suit, paraplegia, walking support, intention estimation, floor reaction force 

1. INTRODUCTION 

People may have muscle rigidity, relaxation, involuntary contraction of muscle, and sensory 
paralysis due to cerebral paralysis, stroke, spinal cord injury, muscular dystrophy and post- 
polio syndrome. Even if people do not suffer from these physical problems, aging brings 
various troubles on his/her motility. Most people who have problems on the lower limbs 
due to these symptoms or aging are unable to walk and are bedridden all day long at worst. 
Moreover, this situation depresses the patients' feelings, for instance bedridden patients lose 
his/her life worth living. Caregivers including the patient's family also receive hard works to 
look after him/her, once a person has a trouble in the motility. To relieve these problems and 
to support the patient's independent life, it is quite important to provide a safe and convenient 
transportation device. A wheelchair is now used in most cases as a transportation device for 

384 Climbing and Walking Robots 

patients with gait disorder. It is convenient for the patients because they can move easily as 
long as an enough muscular power is left in their upper body Even if a patient has weakness 
of the arms, a motorized wheelchair could be used. However, wheelchairs have some prob- 
lems in its using environment and the user's posture. Especially, wheelchair users are apt to 
keep sitting posture for a long time and have less opportunities to exercise their own lower 
bodies. That may cause a decrease in not only muscular power of lower body with paralysis 
but also residual physical functions. This problem could be solved if a patient with paraplegia 
could walk on his/her legs as a healthy person does. Therefore, a device which helps a patient 
walk in his/her standing posture would be one of the solutions since he/she can locomote 
with his/her leg receiving a physical support. Several devices for walking support have been 
developed. In our study, a wearable type robot "Robot suit HAL (Hybrid Assistive Limb)" 
has been developed in order to physically support wearer's daily activities and heavy works. 
HAL-1 utilizing DC motors and ball screws shown in Fig. 1(a) was developed as the first 
prototype of HAL [1], and it enhanced wearer's walking by amplifying wearer's own joint 
torque. After developing some prototypes, HAL-3 shown in Fig. 1(b) was developed toward 
a more suitable system to be used in actual daily life [2, 3]. These robot suits have a power 
unit on each hip and knee joint, and they support functional motions of lower limbs with 
multiple joints simultaneously. After that, HAL-5 (see Fig. 1(c)), that is demonstrated at the 
2005 World Exposition in Aichi, has been developed for whole body support. It assists human 
motions involving wearer's upper-body activities such as carrying heavy loads. Meanwhile, 
"RoboKnee" [4] and "Wearable Walking Helper" [5] have been developed to support the knee 
motion by using linear actuators. However, it is difficult for these two devices to support a 
patient with paraplegia since these devices cannot support their multiple joints in lower limbs 
simultaneously. As an exoskeleton to assist soldiers, disaster relief workers and other emer- 
gency personnel who needs to move long distance on foot on their fields, Kazerooni et al., 
[6, 7] has developed "BLEEX" that supports human's walking while carrying heavy loads on 
his/her back. This exoskeleton is not designed for welfare purposes, and it is too large and 
heavy (75 kg including exoskeleton weight and maximum payload) for patients to handle as 
their own supporting devices in actual daily life. To provide effective physical support accord- 
ing to each wearer's condition, it is necessary to strongly focus on control algorithm as well 
as mechanism of supporting devices. The robot suit HAL has a cybernic control system that 
is a hybrid control algorithm consisted of "Cybernic voluntary control (Bio-cybernic control)" 
and "Cybernic autonomous control (Cybernic robot control)". The cybernic control system 
can provide suitable physical support to wearers in various conditions such as a healthy per- 
son, a physically challenged person and so on by using two algorithms as complementary 
controls. 

The features of each control algorithm are described below. The cybernic voluntary control 
provides physical support according to his/her voluntary muscle activity. Power units of 
HAL generate power assist torque by amplifying wearer's own joint torque estimated from 
his/her bioelectrical signals, and the support motions are consequently controlled by wear's 
signal adjustment. This control was used for power assist of healthy person's activities [8], for 
example walking and standing up from sitting posture, and we confirmed the cybernic vol- 
untary control successfully supported a wearer's motion. The bioelectrical signals including 
myoelectricity are useful and reliable information to estimate human's motion intentions be- 
cause the signals are measured just before corresponding muscle activities. Thus, the wearers 
receive the physical support directly by unconscious interface using the bioelectrical signals, 
which realize much more easily operation than manual controllers such as a joystick. HAL 

Intention-Based Walking Support for Paraplegia Patients with Robot Suit HAL 

385 

(a) HAL-1 (1999) (b) HAL-3 (2001) (c) HAL-5 (2005) 

Fig. 1. Representative conventional robot suits we have developed, (a) and (b) HAL supports 
wearer's lower body motion, (c) HAL supports their whole body motion. A twenty kilogram 
load is carried on wearer's single arm. 

can physically support patients with some handicaps on their lower limbs as well as healthy 
people because HAL supports functional motions with multiple joints simultaneously, cov- 
ering whole of lower limbs. However, as a whole, a patient with gait disorder is not able to 
receive walking support by the cybernic voluntary control because the signals that induce a 
broken walking pattern are not used for the power assist, and no signal is observed in the 
severest case. In that case, the cybernic autonomous control can provide an effective physical 
support. 

The cybernic autonomous control autonomously provides a desired functional motion gen- 
erated according to wearer's body constitutions, conditions and purposes of motion support. 
While the bioelectrical signals are mainly used in the cybernic voluntary control, various kinds 
of information except for the bioelectrical signals, such as reaction force and joint angle can be 
used to provide comfortable physical supports. It can be applied to rehabilitation and walk- 
ing support for the patients as well as power assist for healthy people and it enables HAL 
to be used as alternate body functions for their handicaps or weakness of muscular power. 
In that case, HAL needs to observe wearer's conditions and motion intentions from any mo- 
tion information instead of his/her bioelectrical signals in order to provide a suitable support 
with a suitable moment. HAL-3 with the cybernic autonomous control successfully enhances 
healthy person's walking, stair-climbing, standing up from sitting posture and cycling, syn- 
chronizing with his/her body conditions [9]. In that work, floor reaction forces and joint 
angles are used as motion information to detect wearer's conditions. Posture control as well 
as sensing and recognition for environment including a wearer is essential technologies for an 
entirely autonomous physical support, but they remain to be solved. In this paper, the cyber- 
nic autonomous control among the cybernic control system is applied to the robot suit HAL in 
order to support a paraplegia patient's walk. Our conventional cybernic autonomous control 

386 Climbing and Walking Robots 

algorithm [9] cannot be applied to them directly due to variety of patients' body constitutions 
and handicaps. Generally, the human intentions in his/her mind are essentially independent 
from the physical interactions between a body and an environment. As far as we know, no 
current technologies can directly measure and extract the human intentions. However, we 
can sometimes guess the human intentions in his/her mind from his/her appearances or mo- 
tions. Besides, we can estimate his/her corresponding intentions if we observe a motion or 
an appearance that is closely connected with his/her intentions. According to conventional 
works on human transient walking [10, 11], a COG shift to one leg is prior motion to a walk. 
That motion is an indispensable to swing a leg and can be observed earlier than a bioelectri- 
cal signal such as myoelectricity, because it is observed before a human starts swinging a leg, 
while a bioelectrical signal is observed when corresponding muscles start contracting. The 
COG shift can be used for an early and smart trigger to start walking supports, because the 
shift is involved into preliminary motions for a walk and human does not have to operate any 
manual switch to start the walking supports. On the other hand, gait stopping is similar to the 
time-reverse motion of the gait initiation, and the COG stops at around the center of both sup- 
porting legs. Therefore this paper proposes an intention estimator that can estimate his/her 
walking intentions from the COG shift that is closely connected with his/her intention. We 
define that intention-based support (including the walking support) is to provide a physical 
support for the next wearer's desired motion that can be predicted based on the current state 
or motion induced by his/her intention. In a case of walking, a human shifts the COG to a 
supporting leg side before he/she starts swinging a leg. If the robot suit HAL can sense the 
COG shift induced by his/her intention, it can predict his/her walking start and then start 
walking support. Our project aims to realize the comfortable walking supports for paraplegia 
patients that reflect the patients' intentions on the start and stop of walking, cycle and stride 
of walking motion, walking direction and so on. We call the walking support conforming to 
these various intentions of walking "Intention-based walking support". It is hoped that the 
intention-based walking support improves the usability, safety and reliability of the robot suit 
HAL. As the first step, this paper focuses on three kinds of intentions: start and stop of walk- 
ing and the beginning to swing a leg, and proposes a control algorithm that uses patient's 
residual physical functions effectively. We need to observe not only the COG shift in a lateral 
plane but also the forward COG shift and bending of the upper body in order to distinguish 
the gait initiation from other similar motions such as just stepping or changing a supporting 
leg for a leg relaxation. However, the robot suit HAL can understand his/her intention if we 
instruct the wearer to shift the COG to either of his/her legs in order to receive the physical 
support for swinging a leg. Therefore, floor reaction force can be one of reliable information 
that reflects his/her intentions without any manual interfaces if a patient can control his/her 
weight balance in lateral plane by holding a walking frame with own hands. The purpose 
of this study is that HAL helps a patient with paraplegia walk in a standing posture. Based 
on our conventional works, two additional functions should be developed for this purpose. 
First, HAL should generate a suitable bipedal walk according to patient's body constitutions. 
Reference trajectories for each joint support should be designed in another way because the 
bioelectrical signals are not observed from a patient with paraplegia. The reference motions 
consist of swinging wearer's leg, supporting his/her weight and shifting his/her weight from 
one leg to the other. Second, HAL should provide walking support according to patient's 
intentions that are estimated from wearer's COG shift. To achieve two functions mentioned 
above, this paper takes the following approaches. They are: 

Intention-Based Walking Support for Paraplegia Patients with Robot Suit HAL 387 

1. To achieve the bipedal locomotion partially based on walking patterns of a healthy per- 
son, 

2. To estimate wearer's intentions from his/her COG shift that is observed by the floor 
reaction force and 

3. To synchronize support motions with estimated wearer's intentions: the walk start, stop 
and the beginning to swing a leg. 

The following section explains assumptions and approach of this study Section 3 introduces 
the robot suit "HAL-5 Type-C" used in this experiment. Section 4 describes the proposed 
algorithm for walking support and intention estimation. Section 5 shows experimental results 
and verifies the performance of the proposed algorithm in HAL-5 Type-C. Finally, section 6 is 
the conclusion. 

2. ASSUMPTIONS AND APPROACH 

In this paper, a proposed algorithm is applied to the walking support for a paraplegia pa- 
tient called "subject A" in this paper. He has sensory paralysis on both legs, especially left leg 
because of spinal cord injury by traffic accident. He can keep standing posture and slowly 
walk by himself with two canes. In this case, we cannot measure proper bioelectrical sig- 
nals to estimate his intention during walking because of disorder of neural transmission. We, 
therefore, use floor reaction force instead of the bioelectrical signals in this experiment. Floor 
reaction force (FRF) reflects his weight shift during walking and standing. It should be noted 
that he can control his balance holding a walking frame and that our algorithm can estimate 
his intentions from his FRF. That is our algorithm synchronizes the physical support with his 
intentions through his controlled weight balance by using not any manual controllers such 
as a joystick but FRF during walking and standing. The reference patterns to the patient are 
extracted from healthy person's walk. The healthy person's walking motion could be suitable 
to the patient if he/she has the same body constitution as the healthy person. The extracted 
walking motion, however, should be adjusted according to the patient's body constitution 
and handicap conditions, for example a walking cycle and amplitude of each joint trajectory 
in swinging a leg. 

3. ROBOT SUIT HAL 

In the experiment, the robot suit HAL-5 clinical type (HAL-5 Type-C) which is made for the 
subject A is used. Figure 2 shows the overview of HAL-5 Type-C and Fig. 3 is its system 
configurations. As in the case of the conventional type of HAL (HAL-3), HAL-5 Type-C con- 
sists of power units, exoskeletal frames, sensors and a controller. Power units are attached on 
each hip and knee joints and actuate each joint by their torques. On ankle joints, springs are 
attached so that wearer's ankle joints could come back to a normal angle even if any external 
forces do not affect the joints. The spring action contributes to avoiding collisions between a 
toe of a swing leg and a floor. The exoskeletal frames are fixed to wearer's legs with molded 
plastic bands, and transmit torques of the power units to his/her legs. There are angular 
sensors and FRF sensors to measure motion information of HAL-5 Type-C and a wearer for 
wearer's intention estimation. Potentiometers as angular sensors are attached to the each joint 
to measure the joint angles. FRF sensors utilizing the semiconductor-type pressure sensor are 
implemented in shoes. Figure 4 shows the appearance of the shoes of HAL-5 Type-C with 
built-in FRF sensors. The weight of a wearer including HAL-5 Type-C is transferred onto the 

388 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

sensor unit and measured by the pressure sensors. These sensors can also measure the distri- 
bution of load between a toe part and a heel part during walking and standing because two 
sensors are built in the front and rear of the shoe sole inside. In addition, a computer and bat- 
teries are attached on a wearer's waist, and motor drivers and other electrical circuits for the 
signal processing are allocated on each power unit. Compared with the robot suit HAL-3 (see 
Fig. 1(b)), HAL-5 Type-C is improved for patients 7 daily use since there is no large backpack 
on his/her back and a width of the power units in the back view becomes thin enough to pass 
through narrow spaces as shown in Fig. 2. Figure 5 shows angles and rotation directions of 
each joint described in this paper. 

4. CONTROLLER DESIGN 

In this section, we explain a controller for walking support system. Walking motion in this 
work shall be consist of three functions including swinging a leg, landing and supporting a 
body as shown in Fig. 6. In this paper, we call each span of three functions " swing phase", 
"landing phase" and "support phase". In the swing phase, the patterns extracted from healthy 
person's walk are applied as the reference patterns of the proportional and derivative (PD) 
control for the corresponding joints of a wearer. The reference patterns are used for the cor- 
responding leg's control synchronizing with wearer's intention estimated by our proposed 
algorithm. In the landing phase, we realize the leg function for a foot landing by not tracking 
reference patterns but applying constant-value control. Based on our conventional work [12], 
we found that the knee joint of a wearer at landing instance is apt to be flexed by his/her 
own weight and much torque beyond the torque tolerance is needed to compensate for the 
knee bend. Therefore the knee joint has to be extended earlier than the reference pattern by 
constant-value control. In the support phase as well as the landing phase, the leg is sup- 
ported by constant-value control in order to support his weight by one leg. The following 
sub-sections explain the details of the controller algorithm. 

(a) Back view. (b) Side view. 

Fig. 2. HAL-5 Type-C developed for walking support of a paraplegia patient. Total weight is 
15 kg. 

Intention-Based Walking Support for Paraplegia Patients with Robot Suit HAL 

389 

Control PC 

with wireless LAN module 

| Batteries" 

Main body 

Power units 

including potentiometers 

Fastening equipments 

Shoes 

with floor reaction force sensors 

Fig. 3. System configurations of HAL-5 Type-C. 

Fig. 4. Built-in floor reaction force sensors. 

Fig. 5. Rotation directions of each joint. 

390 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

\___l Landing ! 

Support 

: 

Standing 

^^ Support ; Swing |Landing| Support ■ Standing 

Cp-i rrn-m 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 n ill H 1 1 ■ 

Fig. 6. Three functions in walking motion. 

4.1 Reference pattern generation 

As mentioned above, a swing leg in the swing phase is supported by applying reference walk- 
ing patterns measured in healthy person's walk. The reference patterns are generated in the 
following process. 

1. To measure angle data of hip and knee joints in healthy person's walk. 

2. To divide a sequence of the measured walk pattern into patterns of each step and then 
average the walk patterns. 

3. To divide the averaged pattern into three phases and extract a pattern in the swing 
phase. 

At first, we measure a healthy person's walk to acquire the angle data of hip and knee joints 
during walk. In this experiment, we measure a normal walk of a man in his twenties, who 
has the similar body constitutions including height, weight and length of legs to the subject 
A. Second, a sequence of the measured walk pattern is divided into patterns in each step and 
then they are averaged. At this stage, we should pay attention that habits of walking and 
asymmetry between right and left leg step are not reflected in the extracted patterns strongly. 
Figure 7(a) shows walking patterns in one step averaged in this experiment. 
Finally, the averaged walking patterns are divided into patterns in the swing, landing and 
support phase. The swing phase is between a moment when a foot leaves a floor and a mo- 
ment when a thigh is full flexed. The landing phase continues until a moment when a foot 
of the swing leg contacts a ground, and the support phase continues until a moment when 
one step finishes. The walking patterns extracted from a healthy person's walk are shown in 
Fig. 7(b), (c) and (d). Namely, Fig. 7(b) shows the reference angle patterns in the swing phase 

Intention-Based Walking Support for Paraplegia Patients with Robot Suit HAL 

391 

l i 

I 

~ • 

*' — , 

N 

Hip 

.... 

Knee 

^ 0.8 
£ 0.6 

Ta 0.4 

c 

< 0.2 

/ / 

\ 

— ^ x 

i 

, 

, 

i 

) 0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1 

1.2 

Time [sec] 

(a) 

1 ° 

1 "• 

1 ^ 

1 
^ 0.8 

lo. 

/' 

*^ \ 

1 

^ 0.8 

-a 

&0J6 

— s 

1 
-^0.8 

T3 

£o.6 

*5b 0-4 

a 

< 0.2 

/ / 

9)0.4 
a 
< 0.2 

- N 

oh 0.4 

c 
< 0.2 

-' 

- -Xs^ 

- 

-0.2 
( 

i i i 

i 

-0.2 

i 

-0.2 

i 

i 

_j 

) 

0.1 0.2 0.3 

0.4 

) 

0.1 

) 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

Time [sec] 

Time [sec] 

Time [sec] 

(b) (c) (d) 

Fig. 7. Reference walking patterns of joint angle, (a) Patterns in one cycle of walk, (b) Patterns 
in the swing phase, (c) Patterns in the landing phase, (d) Patterns in the support phase. 

used in this walking support. The PD controller to drive a leg swing needs reference angular 
velocity patterns as well as the angle patterns, and the angular velocity patterns are generated 
by differentiating the angle patterns with respect to time. In addition, the time scales of the 
reference patterns are linearly shorten or lengthen so that the walking cycle could be adjusted 
to a wearer's intentions or a wearer's body constitutions. 

On the other hand, a swing leg in the landing phase is supported by constant-value control for 
the preparation of patient's weight support. The reference angle and angular velocity in the 
landing and support phase are empirically set. Table 1 shows reference values in each phase 
of walking support. In this table, d\ ire c and 9h re t show the reference angle and angular velocity 
of a hip joint respectively, and Q] ire ( and Oj cre f show the reference angle and angular velocity of 
a knee joint respectively. In addition, the hip and knee joints should be straightened through 
the landing and support phase in order to support a wearer's weight by one leg. Therefore, 
the reference angle of hip joint in the landing phase is rad. Table 1, however, shows the 
reference angle of knee joint is not rad but -0.052 rad. This over extension of the knee joint 
can prevent the knee joint from bending due to an impact of landing a foot and gravity. In 
general, it is quite harmful for human to extend the knee joint excessively, but HAL does not 
extend wearer's joints beyond the range of motion since fastening equipments of HAL made 
of rigid plastic has a little flexibility and mechanical limiters at knee joints prevent the joints 
from extending more than that angle. HAL controls the joint angle to keep the reference values 
in the support phase until the end of the single leg support phase when a foot of an opposite 
side swing leg touches on a floor. After the foot of the swing leg makes a contact with a floor, 

392 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Swing phase Landing phase Support phase 

6 hre f[md] 

Fig. 7(b) 

0.0 

0.0 (-0.7) 

6 href [rad/ sec] 

Time derivative of Fig. 7(b) 

0.0 

0.0 

O kref [md] 

Fig. 7(b) 

-0.052 

-0.052 

6 kre f[ra.d/sec] 

Time derivative of Fig. 7(b) 

0.0 

0.0 

Table 1. Reference values in one cycle of walking support. 

the reference hip joint angle of the supporting leg switches from 0.0 rad to -0.7 rad shown 
in parentheses of Table 1. This hip extension contributes to the smooth weight shift from a 
current supporting leg to a following one. Reference angular velocity of both joints in the 
landing and support phase consistently maintains 0.0 rad /sec through one cycle of walking 
support. 

4.2 Intention estimator 

Estimation of patients' intentions contributes to support not only comfortably but also safely, 
because an inconformity between the robot suit motion and the patient motion results in his 
stumbling or falling. Instead of the bioelectrical signals used for the control of the conven- 
tional HAL, the floor reaction force is used for an intention estimation of the subject A who 
can control his weight balance using two canes with his hands. The floor reaction force re- 
flects the position of center of gravity (COG) and COG could be the reliable information for 
the intention estimation. For example, a leg could leave a floor and work as a swing leg safely 
if it does not support his/her weight. A support system "HAL" estimates which leg supports 
a wearer's weight, when a wearer begins to swing a right or left leg and when he/she wants 
to stop walking. At first, for example, a right leg is considered to be a support leg when a foot 
contact condition: 

frh > Krh OT (1) 

frt > OCn (2) 

is satisfied, where fa and fa are FRF of a right foot heel side and toe side, respectively. In 
addition, oc r ^ and 0L r \ are thresholds to detect a landing of a right foot. In general, the condition 

(1) is applied in advance of (2) since a healthy person puts a heel of a swing leg on a floor in 
advance of a toe. Patients with paralysis on legs such as the subject A, however, have a foot 
weighed down and may put a toe of a swing leg on a floor in advance of a heel. The condition 

(2) is effective in detecting the landing in cases of paraplegia patients. On the other hand, a 
left leg is considered to be a support leg when a foot contact condition: 

fa > oc lh or (3) 

fit > *lt (4) 

is satisfied, where fa and fa are FRF of a left foot heel side and toe side, respectively. In 
addition, oc^ and % are thresholds to detect a landing of a left foot. 

Second, for example, HAL estimates the intention that a wearer wants to swing a right leg 
when swing start conditions: 

frh < Prh and (5) 

Intention-Based Walking Support for Paraplegia Patients with Robot Suit HAL 393 

frt < Prt (6) 

are satisfied, where ft r h and fi r t are thresholds to detect a moment when each part of a right 
foot leaves a floor. On the other hand, HAL estimates the intention that a wearer wants to 
swing a left leg when swing start conditions: 

flh < Plh and (7) 

fit < Pit (8) 

are satisfied, where /3^ and $\ t are thresholds to detect a moment when each part of a left foot 
leaves a floor. In this study, the following two constraint conditions are added to the above 
conditions for more stable estimation of wearer's intentions. 

1. Do not start to swing a leg unless a foot of the opposite side leg is on a floor. 

2. Do not swing the same leg sequentially. 

HAL estimates the intention that a wearer wants to stop in his/her tracks if it pasts a certain 
time before the swing start conditions (5) and (6), or (7) and (8) are satisfied. In the walking 
support, HAL stops the sequential walking supports and helps a wearer come back to the 
standing posture when a condition: 

tcur ~t r > T W ait OY (9) 

tcur — ti> T W ait (10) 

is satisfied, where t cur , t r and t\ are the current time and the time when the last right or left foot 
touches on a floor. In addition, T wa u is a temporal threshold to switch the walking support 
to the standing posture support. In this moment, the reference angles of all joints are almost 
zero, therefore a backward leg is replaced around a forward leg if a load on the backward leg 
becomes almost zero by his/her weight shift. We set T wa it = 5.0 sec in this experiment. 

4.3 Control Architecture 

Bipedal locomotion using patient's legs is achieved by the tracking control and by phase syn- 
chronization of motion support with patient's intention. This control consists of the PD control 
using reference walking patterns based on healthy person's walk as shown in Fig. 7(a) in the 
swing phase and the constant-value control in the landing and support phase. Figure 8 shows 
a block diagram for this tracking control and phase synchronization. The human intention 
estimator (HIE) located in the upper-left part in the figure has the FRF as inputs for the es- 
timation algorithms described in the section 4.2. Three blocks under the HIE are a library of 
the reference patterns in the swing phase and the reference values in the landing and support 
phase. The HIE allocates these references to two legs during walking. There are six ordinary 
PD control blocks on the right side of the HIE and the library. The upper three blocks are 
controllers for the right leg and the lower ones are for the left leg. The command voltages r r 
and t\ to the power units on both legs are calculated by: 

t y = K r (C r e ref - 6 r ) + K r (C r d ref - r ) and (11) 

394 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

tj = Ki(CiO re f -0i) + Ki(CiO ref - 0] 

(12) 

where r and Q\ are the actual wearer's leg joint angles, 6 r and 0j are angular velocities and 
subscripts r and / mean right and left, respectively. In addition, re f and 6 re f are the reference 
joint angles and the reference angular velocities, respectively. These variables including r r and 
t/ have two elements that correspond to two joints: hip and knee joint. r r , r\, r , Q\, r , 0\, 6 re f 
and 9 re f are given as follows: 

r 

v rh 

o rk 

6 

ref 

?rh 
?rk 

@href 
@kref 

r 

0, 

ref 

T lh 

*lk \ 

Qrh 

&rk . 

' 

0i = 

@href 
@kref 

> 

(13) 

(14) 

(15) 

where subscripts rh,rk, Ih and Ik mean right hip joint, right knee joint, left hip joint and left 
knee joint, respectively. On the other hand, K r and K\ are feedback gains of the joint angle 
errors, and K r and K\ are feedback gains of the joint angular velocity errors. The different 
feedback gains are used in the swing, landing or support phase independently by adopting 
this control architecture. In addition, C r and C\ are gains to the reference joint angles and 
angular velocities. These gains can adjust a joint flexion and a stride length in a wearer's 
supported walk. In this experiment, we set C\ larger than C r in order to avoid collisions of a 
left leg which has a more severe paralysis with a floor in the swing phase. K Tr K\, K r , K\, C r 
and C\ are diagonal matrixes which are given as follows: 

K r 

k rh 
k rk 

K r 

C r 

hk 

K r 

c rh 
c rk 

k rh 

Kk . 

Clh 

i 

C/Jfc . 

Ki 

hk 

(16) 

(17) 

Moreover, the PD gains of swing leg control k r h, k^, k^, k^, k rk , k\ k , k rk and k\ k were deter- 
mined based on frequency responses and step responses of hip and knee joints. The concrete 
procedure is described in Appendix A. 

The control flow for the walking support is as follows. At first, HAL supports a wearer's 
standing posture. Once the conditions shown in the equations (5) and (6) are satisfied, HAL 
starts the PD control for the swing phase in a right leg and for the support phase in a left leg. 
On the other hand, HAL starts the PD control for the swing phase in a left leg and the support 
phase in a right leg once the conditions shown in the equations (7) and (8) are satisfied. The 
PD control for a swing leg continues until HAL finishes the reference swing patterns. After 
that, HAL runs the constant-value control for the landing phase until the condition shown 
in the equation (1) or (2) is satisfied in a case of a right leg and until the condition shown in 
the equation (3) or (4) is satisfied in a case of a left leg. The other leg continues the control 
for the support phase. After HAL detects a contact between a foot of a swing leg and a floor, 
HAL runs the constant-value control for the support phase on both legs and continues the 
control until the next swing start conditions are satisfied. If the conditions are not satisfied, 

Intention-Based Walking Support for Paraplegia Patients with Robot Suit HAL 

395 

frh , frt 

6 ref .9 rt 

Human 

intention 

estimator 

^ 

Gain O r 

to the reference 
patterns & values 

PD gain K r , K r 

for the right leg swing phase 

PD gain K r , K r 

for the right leg landing phase 

PD gain K r , K r 

for the right leg support phase 

T r + 

HAL& a pal i cm 
Right leg 

Viscosity 
and friction 

U T , u r 

flh , fit 

Reference patterns 
for the swing phase 

Reference values 
for the landing phase 

Reference values 
for the support phase 

PD gain K i , K\ 

for the left leg swing phase 

Oref^n 

Gain C/ 

to the reference 

patterns & values 

PD gain Ki , Ki 

for the left leg landing phase 

PD gain Ki , K\ 

for the left leg support phas 

T| + 

HAL & a patient 
Left leg 

Vi\cosin 
and friction 
compensator 

0i, e. 

Fig. 8. Block diagram for tracking control. 

two legs are kept at the final posture of the step. However, the reference angles of all joints are 
almost zero in this phase, therefore a backward leg is replaced around a forward leg if a load 
on the backward leg becomes almost zero by his/her weight shift. Thus, a wearer can come 
back to the standing posture. This algorithm can synchronize walking support with human 
intentions at a walk start instance, a walk stop instance as well as the beginning of leg swing 
during walking. In addition to those walking support, HAL compensates viscosity and static 
friction of the power units [3]. 

5. EXPERIMENT 

The subject A is the patient who has a strong sensory paralysis especially on the left leg and 
can walk slowly using two canes with his both hands. Since he can stand by himself, the 
support aim with HAL is to help his leg swinging forward and sustaining his weight (65 kg). 
This support contributes to stabilize his walk by pushing a swing leg forward and by avoiding 
collisions of a swing leg with a floor. In this experiment, the patient is supposed to keep his 
own stability by holding a walking frame with his arms and a staff supports the walking frame 
for the sake of the patient's safety as shown in Fig. 9. 

5.1 Experimental setup 

In this experiment, the whole thresholds to detect a moment when a foot leaves a floor or 
contacts on a floor expressed as oc^, oc r t, &ih, %it' $rh> fin, ftih and fa are finally set to 50 N based 
on the subject's weight and his impression after some trials. On the other hand, the feedback 
gains for the joint control k^, k^, k^, k^, k r ^, %-, k r ^ and k\\, the gains to the reference joint 
angle and velocity errors c^, c r ^, c//, and c^ and a time span for swinging a leg are adjusted 
through some trials reflecting the subject's impression. The time span for swinging a leg is 
finally set to 0.9 sec at the time. 

396 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Supporting staff 

Subject A with HAL-5 

Fig. 9. Experimental setting. 

5.2 Results 

Figures 10 and 11 show the FRF data and phase transitions on each leg during a walking 
support. In both figures, one leg performs as the support leg up to a toe-off moment when the 
equation (6) or (8) is satisfied and then the leg performs as the swing leg for 0.9 sec and the 
leg begins to support his weight as the support leg from a heel-on moment when the equation 
(1) or (3) is satisfied shortly after the start of the landing phase. In addition, Fig. 12 shows 
the FRF data on both legs and the phase transitions at the start of walking support. The FRF 
of the heel part is almost zero since the subject A leans on the walking frame for the sake of 
safety. On the other hand, the FRF of the toe part reflects the shift of his COG. At first, he 
stands on his legs with a load distribution which the right leg supports about 250 N and the 
left leg supports about 350 N. After that, he shifts his COG in a direction toward his left side, 
and finally the right and left leg begins to perform as a swing leg and support leg, respectively 
when the equations (5) and (6) are satisfied. HAL starts supporting the walk of the subject A 
synchronizing his intentions. Figures 13 and 14 show his each joint angles, their references 
and torques of the power units during walking support. From the results of joint angles in 
these figures, his hip and knee joints follow the reference angles in a almost part of time in 
one cycle of the supported walk. HAL supports his walk based on a healthy person's walk 
as shown in Fig. 7. On the other hand, the results in a latter part of the swing phases show 
his joints do not follow the references, especially knee joint on his left leg which has a severe 
sensory trouble. The knee joint of the subject A resists the actuator of HAL since he does 
not get used to receiving the physical support. The tracking error will be small after enough 
training for relaxation of the knee joint in the swing phase. 

Intention-Based Walking Support for Paraplegia Patients with Robot Suit HAL 397 

6. CONCLUSIONS 

In this chapter, we have proposed the algorithm to estimate patients' intentions so that the 
HAL-5 Type-C could support a patient with paraplegia to walk. The estimation algorithm 
based on the floor reaction force was investigated through the walking support experiments 
for a patient with a sensory paralysis on both legs. The cycle of reference walking patterns was 
adjusted for the patient and the walking support based on the reference walking was achieved, 
synchronizing with a patient's intentions estimated by the algorithm. We confirmed that the 
algorithm successfully estimated corresponding to a patient's intentions. However, it did not 
stabilize a patient's body posture and he had to maintain his balance using a walking frame 
with his hands. One of our future works is to develop a stabilizing algorithm and mechanism 
so that his hand regains its own functions. 

398 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

E 

o _ 1: Support phase 
2:Swing phase 
3:Landing phase 

2 h 

ji 

_ 

12 3 4 

Time [sec] 

Fig. 10. Result of FRF-based intention estimation on right leg. 

Intention-Based Walking Support for Paraplegia Patients with Robot Suit HAL 

399 

600 - 

^400 \- 
U 200 h Heel on 

3 - 

1 

■Si 

1 L 

1: Support phase 
2: Swing phase 
3: Landing phase 

12 3 

Time [sec] 

Fig. 11. Result of FRF-based intention estimation on left leg. 

400 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

8 ^ 2 I- 

1 8P 

12 

Standing posture 

i3 2 \- 
c ^ 1 I- 

Standing posture 

Swing phase 

Support phase 

1 1.5 

Time [sec] 

2.5 

Fig. 12. Start of walking support by intention estimation. 

Intention-Based Walking Support for Paraplegia Patients with Robot Suit HAL 

401 

- 

J I 

1: Support phase 
2:Swing phase 
3:Landing phase 

, 

, I , 

4 6 

Time [sec] 

Fig. 13. Right leg joint angles with reference angles and power units' torques in each phase. 

402 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

3 - 

1 - 

1: Support phase 
2: Swing phase 
3:Landing phase 

4 6 

Time [sec] 

Fig. 14. Left leg joint angles with reference angles and power units' torques in each phase. 

Intention-Based Walking Support for Paraplegia Patients with Robot Suit HAL 403 

Acknowledgments 

This research was partially supported by Grant-in- Aid for Scientific Research (General Re- 
search (A), No. 17206045, 2005-2008) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science 
and Technology of Japan and by Health and Labour Sciences Research Grants (No. H17-Physi- 
005, 2005-2007) from the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of Japan. 

7. REFERENCES 

[I] Junpei Okamura, Hiroshi Tanaka and Yoshiyuki Sankai, EMG-based Prototype Powered 

Assistive System for Walking Aid, in Proc. of Asian Symposium on Industrial Automa- 
tion and Robotics (ASIAR'99), Bangkok, pp.229-234 (1999). 

[2] Takao Nakai, Suwoong Lee, Hiroaki Kawamoto and Yoshiyuki Sankai, Development of 
Powered Assistive Leg for Walking Aid using EMG and Linux, in Proc. of Asian Sym- 
posium on Industrial Automation and Robotics (ASIAR'01), Bangkok, pp.295-299 (2001). 

[3] Lee S. and Sankai Y, Power Assist Control for Walking Aid with HAL-3 Based on EMG and 
Impedance Adjustment around Knee Joint, Proc. of IEEE/RSJ International Conference 
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS 2002), EPFL, Switzerland, pp.1499-1504 (2002). 

[4] Jerry E. Pratt, Benjamin T. Krupp, Christopher J. Morse and Steven H. Collins, The 
RoboKnee: An Exoskeleton for Enhancing Strength and Endurance During Walk- 
ing, in Proc. of the 2004 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA 
'04), New Orleans, pp.2430-2435 (2004). 

[5] Takahiko Nakamura, Kazunari Saito and Kazuhiro Kosuge, Control of Wearable Walking 
Support System Based on Human-Model and GRF, Proc. of the 2005 IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA '05), Barcelona, pp. 4405-4410 (2005). 

[6] H. Kazerooni, Ryan Steger and Lihua Huang, Hybrid Control of the Berkeley Lower Ex- 
tremity Exoskeleton (BLEEX), The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 25, pp. 
561-573 (2006). 

[7] Ryan Steger, Sung Hoon Kim and H. Kazerooni, Control Scheme and Networked Control 
Architecture for the Berkeley Lower Extremity Exoskeleton (BLEEX), in Proc. of the 
2006 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA '06), Orlando, 
Florida, pp. 3469-3476 (2006). 

[8] Hiroaki Kawamoto and Yoshiyuki Sankai, Power Assist System HAL-3 for Gait Disorder 
Person, Proc. of the 2002 International Conference on Computers Helping People with Spe- 
cial Needs (IC-CHP 2002), Linz, Austria, pp. 196-203 (2002). 

[9] Hiroaki Kawamoto and Yoshiyuki Sankai, Power assist method based on Phase Sequence 
and muscle force condition for HAL, Advanced Robotics, vol. 19, No. 7, pp. 717-734 
(2005). 

[10] Masashi SATO, Hidetaka IKEUCHI, Ryozo KATOH and Tadashi YAMASHITA, Experi- 
mental Analysis of Reaction Force and Motion of Center of Gravity during Human 
Gait Initiation (Characteristics of Transferring from Transient Phase to Steady-State 
Phase), Trans. JSME (Series C), Vol.59, No.566, pp.3101-3107 (1993). (in Japanese) 

[II] H. Ikeuchi, K. Shinkoda, R. Katoh, M.Sato, T. Yamashita, Analysis of Human Transient 

Walking by Wavelet Transform, Proc. of The Third International Symposium on Artificial 
Eife and Robotics, Beppu, Japan, pp.695-698 (1998). 
[12] Suzuki K., Kawamura Y, Hayashi T., Sakurai T., Hasegawa Y and Sankai Y, Intention- 
Based Walking Support for Paraplegia Patient, Proc. of the 2005 IEEE International 
Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics (SMC2005), Hawaii, pp.2707-2713 (2005). 

404 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Appendix A 

The PD gains of swing leg control k^, k^, k^, k^, k^, k^, k^ and k^ (see equations (16)) were 
designed in preliminary experiments. In this appendix section, proportional gains for the hip 
joints k r h and k^ are expressed by k^, and proportional gains for the knee joints k r ^ and k^ 
are expressed by k^ for convenience of explanation. On the other hand, derivative gains for 
the hip joints k^ and k^ are expressed by k^, and derivative gains for the knee joints k^ 
and k\k are expressed by k^. Figure 15 shows experimental environments, where one leg 
can swing freely and the other leg supports a subject's weight. At first, hip or knee joint is 
controlled by the PD feedback control to examine the frequency response. The reference joint 
angle patterns are expressed by sine function with seven different frequencies, ranging from 
0.1 to 3.0 Hz, and with 1.0 rad peak-to-peak amplitude. Five different PD gains, ranging that 
the proportional gain is from 20.0 to 200.0 and the derivative gain is from 0.02 to 0.20, are 
tested. Figures 16 and 18 show the frequency responses of hip and knee joints on Bode plot. 

0.6 Reference hip angle 

0.4) 

Reference knee angle 

1.0 [rad] 

1.0 [rad] 

(a) Experimental motion for hip joint. 

(b) Experimental motion for knee joint. 

Fig. 15. Experimental settings for each joint frequency response. A subject with the robot suit 
HAL stands inside a frame with one leg on a raised block so that the other leg can swing freely. 
The subject are asked to keep the upper body upright and completely relax the leg to follow 
reference joint motions produced by the HAUs power units. Two sine curves in the figure 
show the reference joint angle patterns on each joint. 

Then, a unit step response of each joint is examined with six different PD gains. Figures 17 and 
19 show the responses of hip and knee joints. From the viewpoint of amplitude characteristic, 
resonance frequency and phase shift on the hip joint shown in Fig. 16, the sufficient response 
could be obtained when the range that k^ was from 100.0 to 200.0 and k^ was from 0.10 to 
0.20 at less than 0.5 Hz, which equaled leg swing frequency in this walking support. Besides, 
Figure 17 shows little overshoot and sufficient convergence at the proportional gain of k^ = 
100.0 and the derivative gain of k^ = 0.10 for the unit step response. In consideration of those 
results, we set the hip joint feedback gains k^ and k^ equaled 100.0 and 0.10 in the actual 
walking supports. In the same way, the sufficient response was observed when the range that 
k*k was from 100.0 to 200.0 and k^ was from 0.10 to 0.20 at less than 1.0 Hz on the knee joint, 

Intention-Based Walking Support for Paraplegia Patients with Robot Suit HAL 

405 

Frequency [Hz] 

Fig. 16. Frequency response of hip joint shown in Bode plot. Upper graph and lower one show 
amplitude characteristic and phase characteristic, respectively. Line No. 1 is a characteristic 
curve in a case of "k^ = 20.0 and k^ = 0.02". Similarly, line No. 2, No. 3, No. 4 and No. 
5 show that of '% h = 50.0 and k* h = 0.05", '% h = 100.0 and k* h = 0.10", '% h = 150.0 and 
k*h = 0.15" and "k^ = 200.0 and k^ = 0.20", respectively. The all five lines are drawn using 
a cubic spline curve in order to express the correspondence with seven points in the same set 
of feedback gains. They therefore interpolate the experimental data and would not precisely 
express the real values. 

as shown in Fig. 18. We also set the knee joint feedback gains of 100.0 and 0.10 from the 
viewpoint of overshoot and oscillation on the step response, as shown in Fig. 19. 

406 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

0.8 
0.6 
0.4 

0.2 
■ 

Time [sec] 
(a) k* h = 20.0,fc +/l = 0.02 

Time [sec] 
(c) K h = 100.0, Aw* = 0.10 

1.2 
1 

0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 - 

-1 

Time [sec] 

(e) k* h = 200.0, k* h = 0.20 

l 

0.8 

1 

0.6 

c 
< 

0.4 

0.2 

Time [sec] 
(b) k+ h = 50.0, kh = 0.05 

Time [sec] 
(d) K h = 150.0, K h =0.15 

Time [sec] 

(f) k* h = 300.0, K h = 0.30 

Fig. 17. Step responses of hip joint on six kinds of feedback gains (PD gains). Dashed lines 
and solid lines in the graphs show step inputs and actual angular variations, respectively. 

Intention-Based Walking Support for Paraplegia Patients with Robot Suit HAL 

407 

-100 

-140 

Frequency [Hz] 

Fig. 18. Frequency response of knee joint shown in Bode plot. Upper graph and lower one 
show amplitude characteristic and phase characteristic, respectively. Line No. 1 is a character- 
istic curve in a case of "k* k = 20.0 and k* k = 0.02". Similarly, line No. 2, No. 3, No. 4 and No. 
5 show that of '% k = 50.0 and k* k = 0.05", "k* k = 100.0 and k* k = 0.10", "k* k = 150.0 and 
k* k = 0.15" and "k* k = 200.0 and k* k = 0.20", respectively. The all five lines are drawn using 
a cubic spline curve in order to express the correspondence with seven points in the same set 
of feedback gains. They therefore interpolate the experimental data and would not precisely 
express the real values. 

408 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Time [sec] 
(a) k*% = 20.0,fc* fc =0.02 

1 

A 

ft 

0.8 

1 • 

& 0.6 

0.2 

i 

Time [sec] 
(c) k* k = 100.0, k* k =0.10 

(e) /c* fc 

Time [sec] 
: 200.0, k* k =0.20 

1.2 

l 

0.8 
0.6 

0.4 

0.2 

Time [sec] 
(b) k* k = 50.0,fc* fc =0.05 

Time [sec] 
(d) K k = 150.0, Kk =0.15 

Time [sec] 
(f) k* k = 300.0, fc* fe = 0.30 

Fig. 19. Step responses of knee joints on six kinds of feedback gains (PD gains). Dashed lines 
and solid lines in the graphs shows step inputs and actual angular variations, respectively. 

24 

Development of Vision Based Person Following 
Module for Mobile Robots in RT-Middleware 

Hiroshi Takemura, Zentaro Nemoto, Keita Ito and Hiroshi Mizoguchi 

Tokyo University of Science 
Japan 

1. Introduction 

Recently, the role a robot can play in a person's daily life has increased drastically over the 
years. There are many researches that aim to communicate and interact with human in a real 
environment. In order to achieve such purpose in a real environment, robots need the ability 
to see the person and adjust to the person's behavior. Such ability is an indispensable 
function for safety and security as well as carrying out tasks. The ability to automatically 
follow a person is a key enabling technology for mobile robots to effectively interact with 
the surrounding world. If a robot combines a communication function with speech- 
recognition, a grasping function with arms and a person following function, we believe that 
the robot can serve the person well (Fig.l). The robot must follow the person intelligently 
not only in a limited environment such as an indoor office but also in real world such as a 
crowded area outdoors. In order to continue following the person intelligently in an 
indoor/ outdoor environment, the robot needs a robust adaptive control system under 
varying illuminations. 

In this chapter, we describe the robust person following method based on disparity images 
and HSV color spaces from a color stereo camera and distance information from the laser 
range sensor. The proposed person following method applies for an inverted pendulum 
type robot, Segway RMP200 (Segway Japan, Ltd.) and a humanoid type service robot, enon 
(FUJITSU Ltd.). The validity of the proposed methods is confirmed though the person 
following experiments in an indoor/ outdoor environment under varying illuminations. 

Fig. 1. Overview of Person Following Mobile Robot Service 

410 Climbing and Walking Robots 

2. Person Following Mobile Robot 

In order to follow a person, the first thing the robot must do is find the target person. Many 
researches using fixed camera images find the target person by using such characteristics as 
the face, human body shape, background subtraction, etc.( 2006, Kwon et al., 2005, Negishi 
et al, 2004, Ohya & Munekata, 2002, Schlegel et al, 1998, Schulz et al, 2003, Sidenbladh et al, 
1999). (The following problems, however, occur when the robot follows the target person by 
using a camera located on the robot, because both of the camera and the target person are 
moving.) 

1) Background changing problem. The background is always changing because the camera 
is moving. 

2) Occlusion problem. Camera images change according to distance between the robot and 
the target person. 

3) Position problem. The image size of the target person is changeable. 

4) Direction problem. The robot cannot see the target person's face at all times. Face tracking 
is not the best method in this case. 

5) Multi person problem. Robot has to find the target person even if several people exit in 
the frame. 

6) Brightness problem. The light condition, sunshine and shadow become a major problem 
when the robot moves between indoor/ outdoor environments. 

7) Real-time problem. Calculation cost is important for person following. 

We proposed a robust person following method to solve such problems. The proposed 
method uses three information; the disparity images, HSV color spaces images from a color 
stereo camera, and the distance information from the laser range sensor. The proposed 
method does not depend on the image size, the target person's shape and face, but depends 
on the color histogram of the target person's clothes and the distance between target person 
and background. We also proposed the multi HS histogram sequential update method for a 
color extraction method to realize the person following in real surrounding. 

3. Person's Area Detection Image Processing Method 

3.1 HS Histogram Based Color Extraction Method 

This section describes the target person detection method based on target color extraction 
image processing method. First, the target person's color images are registered by captured 
multi view point around the target person. Usually, clothing color is not the same 
throughout, print and color are not same on the front and back, or on the left and right side. 
If only one color of the person's clothes is registered, the robot cannot find the target person 
when the target person changes his/her walking direction. Fig.2 shows the template 
histogram created by a front image of the target person. The x axis indicates H value of HSV 
color space, y axis is S value of HSV color space, z axis is a normalized number of HS pixels. 
Fig.3 also shows the template histogram created by the back image of the target person. In 
this example, the front template has two peaks indicating blue and purple, and the back side 
temple has one peak indicating purple. These templates show that there are differences 
found in the colors found on the front and back side of the same person's clothes, even if 
same person. 

Development of Vision Based Person Following Module for Mobile Robots in RT-Middleware 41 1 

Fig. 2. Template Histogram (front side) 

Fig. 3. Template Histogram (back side) 

Pixel 

H 

Fig. 4. Base Template Histogram 

412 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig.4 is a base template histogram connected by the front and back templates. The base 
template is also normalized by multi template histogram. Fig.4 (right) indicates the number 
of pixels as the brightness (0 to 1). 

The next step is to cluster the base template histogram by using the Nearest Neighbor 
algorithm. The NN method is a method for classifying objects based on closest training 
examples in the feature space. The NN method was applied to the base template histogram, 
and the result is shown in Fig.5. There is no guarantee that a target person wears unique 
color clothes. The proposed method can extract multi colors by using the clustered 
histogram. In this example, the base template histogram divided into clusters. One of them 
indicates a blue color on target person's clothes, and the other a purple color. The 
advantages of using clustering of the base template histogram are that multi color templates 
are available and that some small color space and noise can be neglect. 

Pixel 

Fig. 5. Clustered Histogram by NN Method 

3.2 Updating HS Histogram by Anisotropic Asymmetric Gaussian Distribution Model 

The clustered histogram is not a Gaussian distribution and the HS histogram has an 
anisotropic characteristic. The S value is more changeable than the H value under varying 
illumination. The weight of each color cluster is calculated by using an anisotropic 
asymmetric Gaussian kernel function. The center cluster position (u,v) and the distribution 
value <^{0) are needed to define the anisotropic asymmetric Gaussian distribution in the H-S 
plane. The definition of the anisotropic asymmetric Gaussian distribution model (Umeda et 
al., 2006) is given by 

W{h,s) = W{r,e) = e 2al{0) , 

(i) 

where r is a distance from the center of a cluster to the outer perimeter of the cluster and 6 is 
an angle (0<<9<2;z) of orientation around the center. The H-S rectangular coordinate system 
is transformed to r- 6 polar coordinate system. Fig. 6 shows the calculation result of the 
anisotropic asymmetric Gaussian distribution filter for weighting the HS histogram. 

Development of Vision Based Person Following Module for Mobile Robots in RT-Middleware 

413 

W 

Fig. 6. Anisotropic Asymmetric Gaussian Distribution Filter for Weighting Histogram 

In order to extract the target colors under varying illumination and cut noise, the weighted 
histogram has to update according to the lighting condition. The weighted histogram (H w ) 
updates based on the target person's area. HS ne w(t) is a current histogram acquired by the 
detected target person's area. H w (t-1) is old histogram. Wis weight calculated by equation 1. 
H w (t) is calculated as follows: 

««<«)- M*-i)+wr*HS_(t) 

max(Ha;(J-l) + WxHS„„(J)) 

3.3 Target Person Detection Processing Flow 

The processing flow of the target person area determination method by using color, distance 
information and weighted histogram is shown in Fig. 7. 

1) Background Elimination: The background is eliminated by using the distance information 

from the stereo camera to reduce the color matching calculation cost. The area, 
which has the distance far from threshold value, is defined as the background area. 

2) Color Extraction: The target person's color is extracted based on the weighted HS 

histogram. 

3) Target Area Detection: The target person's area is detected based on the extracted pixels 

and a profiling process (Itoh et al., 2006). The profiling process is the position search 
method used maximum sum of x axis and y axis of the extracted pixels. 

4) Histogram Update: The weighted histogram is updated based on the target person's area. 

In order to adjust to varying lighting condition, the weighted histogram is 
continuously to update using Equation (2). 

414 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

4)HS Histogram Update 

3)Target 
Area 
Detect 

Fig. 7. Target Person Area Determination Process 

3.4 Target Person's Area Detection Experiment Results 

Fig. 8 shows the target person's area detection experiment results. In Fig.8, (a) are the target 
person's area detection results, (b) the target color extraction results, (c) HS ne w histogram of 
the detected target person's area, and (d) are the updated weighted H w (t) histogram. The 
bottom numbers in the results indicate processing time [second]. The green rectangles 
indicate the target person's detected area. The lighting condition is changing; normal 
condition, becoming darker, becoming brighter and normal condition. As the results of time- 
series of (a), the target person could be tracked successfully in this experiment regardless of 
the size, shape, direction of target person and the varying illumination. It is understood that 
the histogram could be update according to the varying illumination. The background color, 
however, was not extracted, and only the target person could be tracked. This is the effect of 
the introduced anisotropic asymmetric Gaussian distribution filter. It estimated the 
changeable color range of the target person and the update process was actually performed 
only within the range. 

Development of Vision Based Person Following Module for Mobile Robots in RT-Middleware 415 

0:00 

0:01 

0:02 

0:07 

0:08 

0:09 

0:10 0:11 

Fig. 8. Results of Target Person Detection Image Processing 

0:12 

4. Target Person Tracking by Laser Range Finder 

4.1 Robust Target Person Tracking by LRF 

A normal camera has a narrow dynamic range, the black out effect or the white out effect 
are caused when the robot moves from indoor to outdoor and vice versa, or moves against 
the sun, even if the proposed HS histogram sequential updating color extraction method is 
applied. The proposed method does not adjust to such a major illumination change. Thus, 
we also proposed the robust target tracking method by using the Laser Range Finder (LRF: 
UTM-30LX, HOKUYO CO., LTD.). In this method, the target person is detected by the 

416 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

proposed stereo camera based method. The LRF is a laser range sensor, which can be used 
in an outdoor environment. LRF is not greatly influenced by the lighting condition. 

4.2 LRF Target Tracking Method 

The Nearest Neighbor Clustering method based on the input data from LRF (Hashimoto et 
al, 2006, Ishihara et al, 2002, Kawata et al, 2005, Okusako et al, 2006, Lindstrom & Eklundh, 
2001) applies to the LRF target tracking method. The LRF can be used stably and can adjust 
to such varying lighting conditions of the camera system such as a black out or a white out 
caused by sunlight. The LRF target tracking method is that the cluster of distance data 
around the robot is calculated by the Nearest Neighbor Clustering method and the target 
person's cluster is searched and tracked based on a shape of cluster and a Euclidean distance 
between each cluster. The process flow is described as follows: 

(1) Converting distance date from the LRF to 2-dimensinal coordinate data (Fig.9 (a)). 

(2) Clustering by NN method (Fig.9 (b)). 

(3) Numbering only human size clusters and calculating center of each target person 
candidate's clusters (Fig.9 (c)). 

(4) Tracking the target person's cluster that is the nearest position of the target person's area 
calculated by the proposed camera based method or that is the nearest position of the 
pervious target person's cluster. 

Fig. 9. Results of Target Person Detection Image Processing: (a) Input Data (b) Results of 
Clustering (c) Center of Each Class 

5. Target Person's Position Determination 

The target person's position is determined based on the result of the proposed target 
person's area detection method and the proposed LRF target tracking method. In order to 
adapt to the changing image size and shape of the target person, the proposed target 
person's area detection method uses the color information as the target person's 
identification. The proposed LRF target tracking method calculates the target cluster 
position based on the size of 2-dimentional cross section shape and the time-series data. 
Although the camera based method has some trouble adjusting to rapid lighting condition 
change, the camera based method can re-detect when some occlusions occurred and the 
target is lost. Although the LRF target tracking method was trouble tracking the target 
person when some occlusions occurred and cannot determine the target person by using 
only LRF data, the LRF target tracking method can adjust to rapid changing lighting 

Development of Vision Based Person Following Module for Mobile Robots in RT-Middleware 

417 

condition. The target person's position is determined by integrated the result of the target 
person's area and the result of the LRF target tracking method to adjust to occlusion and 
changing lighting condition. 

5.1 Integration of Camera Information and LRF Distance Information 

The target person's area and the target person's cluster position should be the same when 
the robot moves in a stable environment. Fig.10 shows the integrated camera and LRF 
results. The outputs of both methods are the same. However, in real environment, the 
lighting condition is unstable and some occlusions occur by obstacles and other people. 
Sometimes the robot cannot detect the target person's area and the robot cannot track the 
target person's cluster. Although the camera system can track the target person as well as 
detect the target person, the camera system has a major problem (white/ black out, against 
the sunlight) when the robot moves from indoors to outdoors and vice verse. The LRF target 
tracking method is not effect by sunlight and can be used in an outdoor environment. 
However, the target person cannot be detected by only using the LRF method. Another 
method is needed to detect the target person's initial position when the robot has lost the 
target person. Thus, the integration of the two difference method can compensate the 
potential weakness. At first, the target person's area is detected by using the camera based 
method. Then, the target person's position is tracked by the LRF based method based on the 
camera based method result. Although the output from the LRF based method is used as the 
robot command input, the HS histogram continues to update according to the lighting 
condition. When the LRF based method has lost the target person's position by occlusion or 
other reason, the camera based method re-detects the target person's area by using the 
updating HS histogram method. 

PersonDetectLRF 

Fig. 10. Integration of Target Person's Position Calculated by the Image Method and the LRF 
Method 

418 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

6. Indoor/Outdoor Target Person Following Experiment 

6.1 Evaluation of Target Person Following Method 

The snapshots of the indoor target person following experiment are shown in Fig. 11. The 
robot can follow the target person in an indoor environment. The inverted pendulum type 
robot, Segway RMP200 (Segway Japan, Ltd.), is used as the robot platform. The robot has a 
color stereo camera (STOC: Videre Co. Ltd.) located on a two-axis (pan/ tilt) motion control 
device (Biclops PT: TRACLabs Inc.). A LRF (UTM-30LX: HOKYOU Co. Ltd.) is also located 
on the robot. All devices are controlled by one laptop computer. Fig.12 shows the 
trajectories of the target person and the robot calculated by the robot's odometer. The robot 
keeps a distance from the target person within 3 meter during the target person following. 
The target person following ability of the robot in simple environment is verified through 
this experiment. 

Lfl i I M Wtti HUM g, 

0:00 0:05 0:10 0:15 

:20 0:25 

Fig. 11. Snapshots of Target Following Test 

xm 

y[m] 

8 - 

7 - 

6 - 

5 - 

4 - 

3 - 

2 - 

-e- 

1 1 ( 

) 

: 

i : 

\ i i 

i i 

' I 

i 

i 

^— Target Human Position 
^— Robot Position 

z 

y 

, En 

d Posit 

ion 

A 

+ EndP 

ssition 

- 4 

-0 

Start Positit 
Start Positit 

>n 

-6 

/ 

' — s» — ' 

Fig. 12. The Target and the Robot Trajectory during the Target Following Test 

Development of Vision Based Person Following Module for Mobile Robots in RT-Middleware 419 

0:04 

I 

0:05 

0:06 

0:07 

iJ&tfci 

l^flft 

*M 

* % i'iW * ^ 

1-4 [»>, J 

\aM\ *«dL>! 

ii B^fp U - 

ffifll 

m ~~^^^i 

^ j^B x3BPC^**^^ » 

0:08 

0:09 

0:10 

0:11 

Fig. 13. Person Following Experiment (Indoor Environment) 

6.2. Indoor to Outdoor Target Person Following Experiments 

The pervious experiment was performed in an indoor environment with a stable lighting 
condition. In this section, the experiments of target following is conducted in a more 
complicated environment, and the robustness of the proposed method are evaluated. Fig.13 
shows the experiment result of an indoor environment with multi persons wearing the same 
color shirt. The space that the robot can move is limited and crowded with people. In such 
environment, the robot must not make a false recognition and the robot must adjust to the 
target person's movement. The proposed method uses the background subtraction based on 
the distance information of the stereo camera and also uses the time-series data. Therefore 
the robot can detect and track the target person in such a narrow space with other person 
wearing the same color shirt. The robot has the function to adjust to the target person's 
velocity. When the target person walks slowly in a crowded space, the robot tries to reduce 
the distance from the target person, and moves slowly according to the target person's 
walking velocity. Thus the robot achieves the target person following in such environment. 

Fig. 14 shows the experiment results when the robot moves from indoor to outdoor. The 
major illumination change occurs when the robot moves from indoor to outdoor, even 
human is dazzled by the bright sunlight. The image device usually has a narrow dynamic 
range, and the stereo camera is hard to adjust to varying illumination compared to human 
eyes. However, the LRF is little effected by the sunlight because the LRF uses a laser to 
measure the distance around the sensor. Therefore the robot can track and follow the target 
person in such lighting conditions. 

420 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

0:04 

0:05 

0:06 

0:07 

( ^|c i^yif 

0:08 0:09 0:10 

Fig. 14 Person Following Experiment (From Indoor to Outdoor) 

0:11 

0:08 0:09 0:10 

Fig. 15. Person Following Experiment (Outdoor Environment) 

Fig. 15 shows the person following experiment result when the robot moves in an outdoor 
environment. In comparison to the indoor environment, uneven surface, sunshine and 
shadow become serious problems in an outdoor environment. However, the robot also 
performs the target person following in an outdoor environment in where several people 

Development of Vision Based Person Following Module for Mobile Robots in RT-Middleware 

421 

wearing the same color shirt exist. The robot is used the two wheels inverted pendulum 
type robot and has the ability to move on uneven surfaces. The robot adjusts color changes 
according to varying illumination greater than indoor environments by updating the color 
histogram. As in the previous experiment, when the robot moves against the sun, the robot 
cannot detect the target person by using only the camera system. However, the robot can 
continuously perform the target following by using the LRF tracking system in conjunction 
with the camera system. The LRF system is effected only slightly by sunshine. There are 
several people wearing the same color shirt around the target person. The robot can separate 
the target person and the others by the distance information. The robot also uses the time- 
series location information to separate the target person from the crowd. 

0:00 

0:01 

0:02 

fVhif/l 

0:03 

^T""' 

■ M* 

Tn 

0:04 

0:05 

0:06 

0:07 

W£TA^- 

i .**ttWd 

\JTJ£s' -\ <lt 

^^■ftJygVV^' 

^ k i \ ll 

m£ 

- J - ^ 

w 

iHH 

0:08 0:09 0:10 0:11 

Fig. 16. Person Following Experiment (Outdoor and Irregular Terrain Environment) 

Fig. 16 shows the experiment result when the robot moves on an outdoor irregular terrain. 
When the robot moves on a slope, the robot tries to keep a balance by tilting against slope 
because the robot is an inverted pendulum type robot. The tilt angle of the robot on an 
uneven terrain is larger than on an even terrain. In such case, the LRF located on the top of 
the robot rapidly tilts and the target tracking by the LRF will lose the target person. 
However, when the LRF target tracking method has lost the target person, the camera based 
method can re-detect the target person by the target person's color information. Therefore 
the target person following ability of the robot in real environment is verified through the 
experiment. 

422 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

0:08 0:09 0:10 

Fig. 17. Snapshots of Person-Robot Following Experiment 

0:11 

7. Target Robot Following Experiment 

The proposed target person following method detects, tracks and follows the target person 
by using the target person's clothes color histogram and the target person's position history 
information. The method can be applied not only to human but also to other object, because 
the method does not use the temperature distribution of the target person by thermography 
or the shape of the target person for image processing. Additionally, the proposed methods 
can easily change hardware, because all the proposed methods are implemented using RT- 
Middleware (Ando, N. et al., 2005, Ikezoe, A. et al., 2006). Fig.17 shows the experiment 
result of a robot following another robot. Two different type of robots are used in this 
experiment. One is the Segway RMP 200, and the other enon (Kanade et al., 2006) a 
humanoid robot. Enon has two active wheels, two degree of freedom of his neck, a stereo 
camera (STOC) located on his face, and a LRF (UTM-30LX) located on his front. The 
proposed method is applied to these two robots. Enon attempted to follow the target person 
and Segway RMP attempted to follow enon. Thus there experimental result support that the 
proposed method can also be applied to cooperating operations between two or more robots. 

8. Conclusion 

In this chapter, we proposed the robust target person following method based on a color 
stereo camera and a laser range finder in a real environment. All proposed methods are 
implemented using RT-Middleware and therefore the hardware can be easily changed. The 

Development of Vision Based Person Following Module for Mobile Robots in RT-Middleware 423 

proposed method is applied to two different types of robots, one is an inverted pendulum 
robot (Segway RMP), and the other is a humanoid robot (enon). The target person following 
experiments is conducted in an indoor/ outdoor environment and on regular/ irregular 
terrain. The robot can perform the target person following in such environment. The validity 
and utility of the proposed method is verified through these experiments. The target robot 
following experiment is also conducted to confirm the robustness of the proposed method. 
The experimental results support that the proposed method can also be applied to 
cooperating operation between two or more robots. 

9. Acknowledgment 

A part of this work was performed as a project of the New Energy and Industrial 
Technology Development Organization (NEDO). 

10. References 

Ando, N.; Suehiro, T.; Kitagaki, k.; Kotoku, T. & Yoon, W.K. (2005). RT-middleware: 
distributed component middleware for RT (robot technology), Proceedings of 
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 3933- 3938. 

Hashimoto, M.; Ogata, S.; Oba, F. & OKada, S. (2006). Multi-Moving Target Tracking with 
In- Vehicle Laser Range Sensor, Transactions of the Japan Society of Mechanical 
Engineers, C72 (717), pp. 1566-1573. 

Ikezoe, A.; Nakamoto, H. & Nagase, M. (2006). Development of RT-Middleware for Image 
Recognition Module, Proceedings of SICE-ICASE International Joint Conference, pp. 
2036-2041. 

Ishihara, N.; Zhao, H. & Shibasaki, R. (2002). Tracking passenger movement with ground- 
based laser scanner, Proceedings of the 8th Symposium on Sensing via Image 
Information, pp. 13-16. 

Itoh, K.; Kikuchi, T.; Takemura, H. & Mizoguchi, H. (2006). Development of a Person 
Following Mobile Robot in Complicated Background by Using Distance and Color 
Information, Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial 
Electronics Society, pp. 3839-3844 . 

Kanade, S.; Murase, Y.; Sawasaki, N. & Asada, T. (2006). Development of the Service Robot 
"enon", Journal of the Robotics Society of Japan, 24 (3), pp. 288-291. 

Kawata, H.; Mori, T.; & Yuta, S. (2005). Design and Realization of 2-Dimensional Optical 
Range Sensor for Environment Recognition in Mobile Robots, Jounal of Robotics and 
Mechatronics, pp. 116-120. 

Kwon, H.; Yoon, Y.; Park, J. B. & Kak, A. C. (2005). Person Tracking with a Mobile Robot 
using Two Uncalibrated Independently Moving Cameras, Proceedings of the 2005 
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 2888-2894. 

Lindstrom, M. & Eklundh, J.O. (2001). Detecting and Tracking Moving Objects from a 
Mobile Platform using a Laser Range Scanner, Proceedings of 2001 IEEE/RSJ 
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 1364-1369. 

424 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Negishi, Y.; Miura, J. & Shirai, Y. (2004). Mobile Robot Navigation in Unknown 

Environments Using Omni directional Stereo and Laser Range Finder, Proceedings 

of 2004 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 2737- 

2742. 
Ohya, A. & Munekata, T. (2002). Intelligent Escort Robot Moving together with Human - 

Interaction in Accompanying Behavior-, Proceedings 2002 FIRA Robot World 

Congress, pp.31-35. 
Okusako, S. & Sakane, S. (2006). Human Tracking with a Mobile Robot using a Laser Range- 
Finder, Journal of the Robotics Society of Japan 24 (5), pp. 605-613. 
Schlegel, C; Illmann, J. & Jaberg, H. (1998). Vision Based Person Tracking with a Mobile 

Robot, Proceedings of the 9th British Machine Vision Conference, Southampton, pp. 418- 

427. 
Schulz, D.; Burgard, W.; Fox, D. & Cremers, A.B. (2003). People Tracking with a Mobile 

Robot Using Sample-based Joint Probabilistic Data Association Filters, International 

Journal of Robotics Research, vol 22, no. 2, pp. 99-116. 
Sidenbladh, H.; Kragic, D. & Christensen, H. I. (1999). A Person Following Behavior for a 

Mobile Robot, Proceedings of the 1999 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 

Automation, pp. 670-675. 
Uemura, H.; Tan, J.K. & Ishikawa, S. (2006). A Color Tracker Employing a Two-dimensional 

Color Histogram Under Changeable Illumination, Proceedings of 2006 IECON, pp. 

3273-3278. 

25 

A-B Autonomy of A Shape-shifting 
Robot "AMOEBA-I" for USAR 

Yuechao Wang, Jinguo Liu and Bin Li 

State Key Laboratory of Robotics 

Shenyang Institute of Automation 

Chinese Academy of Sciences, P.R. China 

1. Introduction 

The frequent nature disasters and man-made catastrophes during the last decades such as 
earthquake, typhoon, hurricane, radiation and terrorist attack have aroused people's 
attention on the importance of Urban Search and Rescue (USAR). Although people have 
more watchfulness than before, a large number of people still have died in unprofessional 
rescue due to inadequate equipment and being lack of professional manpower (Erkmen et 
al, 2002; Casper and Murphy, 2003). Timely searching for victims and subsequent rescue 
operations from the rubble of collapsed buildings are highly required. Since these 
operations are very dangerous for human workers and even for trained dogs, autonomous 
mobile systems are highly needed to help in finding trapped victims. It is a great challenge 
to develop search and rescue robot that can actually work in the disaster site. The search and 
rescue robot research includes not only the robotics technology but also the rescue 
technology and the disaster science. Researches sponsored by the governments and the 
companies have resulted in the emergence of various kinds of search and rescue robots. 
Since earthquake happens in Japan frequently, intelligent rescue systems and robotic 
technology have been expected to mitigate disaster damages, especially after the 1995 
Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake. From 2002, "Special Project for Earthquake Disaster Mitigation 
in Urban Areas" (a 5 years project which also called DDT project) was launched by Ministry 
of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, in Japan. Many kinds of search and 
rescue robots have been developed (Matsuno and Tadokoro, 2004), such as Souryu (Hirose 
and Fukushima, 2002), Moira (Osuka and Kitajima, 2003), and KOHGA (Tetsushi et al, 
2004). In America the rescue robot research has attracted a lot attention too. Several robots 
were used for the search and detection operation in the collapsed World Trade Center 
building in September 2001 (Casper and Murphy, 2003). In the University of South Florida, 
Professor Murphy and her fellow have developed "Bujold", a kind of search and rescue 
robot that has the ability of shape shifting and has been equipped with many sensors 
(Murphy, 2002). In Carnegie Mellon Robotics Institute, researchers have developed 
multi-joint robot for inspection (Wolf et al, 2003). Foster-Miller Company also carries out 
TALON Robot series for search and rescue mission. In China, a series of search and rescue 
robots have been developed in recent years (Liu et al, 2007a; Zhang et al, 2006; Zou et al, 

426 Climbing and Walking Robots 

2006; Huang et al, 2006). Among them a shape-shifting robot named "AMOEBA-I" has been 
developed in the Shenyang Institute of Automation, CAS for search and rescue operation 
(Liu et al, 2004; Li et al, 2006). Since search and rescue robots are usually unmanned 
vehicles, autonomy or autonomous behaviours play key roles in their performances. In this 
chapter, we first provide a brief description of AMOEBA-I. Then, A-B Autonomy of 
"AMOEBA-I" has been discussed. Rules of autonomous shape-shifting for AMOEBA-I in 
urban terrain have been proposed according to the features of AMOEBA-I. Finally, 
experimental results from its autonomous motions (autonomous shape-shifting, 
autonomous navigation, autonomous climbing up obstacle and autonomous avoiding 
obstacle) have demonstrated that the AMOEBA-I shows great autonomy in urban terrain. 

2. Mechanism of shape-shifting 

In unstructured environment operations such as search and rescue, flexibility and 
adaptability are urgently required in such situations for mobile robots since the terrain is 
usually uneven and unpredictable. In nature, there are many kinds of creatures with high 
motilities. For instance, the link-type structure animals, such as snakes and centipedes, 
behave perfect mobility and flexibility in uneven terrain for their redundancy. The link- type 
structures also widely exist in snake-like robots, serpentine robots, and multi-joint robots. 
Inspired by the nature snake that has perfect mobility under various environments, 
link- type robots have been widely studied. Link- type structures are connected sequentially 
with active or passive joints between the adjacent units or modules. They have a large 
number of degrees of freedom. Powered links between the units allow the chain to adapt to 
the terrain, to adopt the desired shape for a particular task, and to lift the front modules to 
surmount obstacles. Generally, the link- type structures, which have been widely applied in 
snake-like robot, train-like robot, trailer-like robot, and multi-joint robot, have turned out to 
be effective mobile mechanisms for reasons listed as follows: 

(1) A link-type robot with active body has excellent mobility. It can pass through 
narrow spaces in line as shown in Figure 1 (a), cross a ditch by stiffening the body 
to bridge the ditch as shown in Figure 1 (b), and lift the front part of the body to 
overcome the obstacles as shown in Figure 1 (d). 

(2) With a low barycentre and sufficient contact to the ground, it has high longitudinal 
stability over uneven terrain and soft ground. As shown in Figure 1 (c), it can 
steadily cross a marsh by loosing joints to distribute its weight to the whole body. 

(3) For a link- type structure with active joints, it can adopt manifold gaits of snakes 
such as serpentine motion, concertina motion, side-winding motion, rectilinear 
motion, thrusting motion, pushing motion, and jumping under different 
environments. 

(4) The link-type structure can be an excellent manipulator by transforming the hyper 
redundant degrees of freedom just like the trunk of an elephant. 

(5) The link-type structure is fault-tolerant to some extent. The reliability and 
maintainability can be high since the rest can still finish the mission even if a link 
cannot work. The malfunctioning segment can also easily be detached and replaced. 

(6) The link-type structure can be easily modularized and reconfigurable. A single 
modular unit only has a limited mobility but a swarm of them generates better 
performances in many areas. 

A-B Autonomy of A Shape-shifting Robot "AMOEBA-I" for USAR 

427 

'//////////////////, 

-+- ^«- — -— 

////////////////////////////////A 

(a) 

V/////////A V/////Z///// 

(b) 

<ZS 

(c) 

'///////////////////ft. 

(d) 

(e) 

Fig. 1. Typical motilities of the link-type structure, (a) Pass through narrow space, (b) Cross 
a ditch, (c) Move over uneven terrain, (d) Overcome the obstacle, (e) Turn around. 

428 Climbing and Walking Robots 

However, being long and slim, the link-type structure also has its disadvantages in some 
situations such as in the debris which mainly include: 

(1) Lateral stability: When moving over uneven terrain, it easily gets lateral tip over as 
shown in Figure 1 (c). If a tip over incident happens, it may result in a series of 
problems: loss of traction, entrapment, system damage, loss of control, difficulty in 
overturning back, and even mission failure. 

(2) Turning mobility: For example, when turning, it needs a large radius as shown in 
Figure 1 (e). When in a narrow space, it is hard for the link- type structure to turn 
around effectively. 

How to take the advantages and surmount the disadvantages of link-type structures is both 
interesting and challenging tasks. For a traditional link- type structure, it can only pose the 
straight or curve configuration since the degree of freedom between adjacent units is usually 
limited by joints' movable range. Therefore, we intend to develop a self -reconfigur able 
link-type robot to improve the tip over stability and the turning mobility of the link-type 
structure. The self-reconfigurable or shape-shifting robots have attracted great attentions 
since they can autonomously change their physical configurations or their structure to meet 
the requirement of the mission and the environment. And the tracked type robots have been 
widely developed for search and research operation. There are usually two kinds of 
reconfigurable track type mobile robot in the literatures. One kind is the track's shape being 
changeable. Reconfigurable tracks can change from one shape to another without 
modification of the vehicle. This approach effectively provides various dimensions of the 
track contacting the ground and the track above the ground. Bujold is a typical example of 
this category. It is a commercially available tracked chemical inspection microrobot which 
can change shape among three canonical configurations: sitting up and facing forward, 
sitting up and facing backward, and lying flat (Murphy, 2002). A new type of variable 
geometry single-track driving mechanism for a rescue robot has been proposed (Lim et al, 
2005). This mechanism has a symmetrical configuration so that the robot advances in dual 
directions and prepares against overturning. Using transformation, it can reduce the energy 
consumption in steering and rotating while maximizing the capacity to overcome stairs. The 
other kind of the reconfigurable track type robot is similar to the self-reconfigurable 
modular robot in principle. For instance, NUGV is a novel multi-degree-of-freedom tracked 
robot that can change its conformation and dimensions, and negotiate a great range of 
environmental dimensionality (Blackburn et al, 2004). The tracked robot CUBIC-R's shape is 
a regular hexahedron and each surface has a crawler unit with a couple of crawlers. As each 
surface is united by transformational mechanism which has 1-DOF, it can overcome rough 
terrains (step, stairs, gap and so on) by using transformation (Tabata et al, 2005). The 
reconfigurable modular type tracked robots have attracted more and more attentions for 
their high mobility. And they will be the ideal selections for urban or field environments. To 
improve the environmental adaptability of the link-type tracked robots, we have proposed a 
novel link-type reconfigurable structure as shown in Figure 2. This link-type structure, with 
Yaw and Pitch offset joints at each module's both lateral sides, has enough flexibility for its 
shape change. The module body is a mobile unit with active tracks. The arms and joints play 
important roles in shape changing process. Figure 2 demonstrates a sequence of 
two-module's reconfiguration. In Figure 2 (a) the link- type is in a line type while in Figure 2 
(e) it is in a row type. From line-type to row type, the Yaw joint rotates 180° and then so 

A-B Autonomy of A Shape-shifting Robot "AMOEBA-I" for USAR 

429 

does the Pitch joint. It behaves the advantages of the link- type structure while in line, 
moreover, it can avoid the line-type's disadvantages while in row. For instance, the robot in 
row can turn easily with a zero radius by driving the lateral modules differentially. This link 
changes its configurations through a sequence of joints' rotation. Compared to 
reconfiguration by connection and disconnection, such kind of reconfiguration has higher 
reliability, less power consumption, and less time consumption. 

Pitch joint 

Yaw joint 

//Slodule A 

—r Pitch joint 

Vjs5y Link arm 
Yaw joint 

(a) 

Pitch joint 

(e) (d) (c) 

Fig. 2. Reconfiguration process of the proposed link-type structure 

For two modules, there are three trim configurations shown in Figure 2 (a), Figure 2 (c) and 
Figure 2 (e), which are also called mobile configuration. The mobile configurations in this 
paper are defined to be the non-isomorphic configurations with parallel driving modules in 
the same plane. That is, in the mobile configuration, all the modules should contact the 
ground in parallel. In following sections, we merely take the mobile configurations into 
consideration in configuration analysis. Figure 3 (a) provides a top-view of these three 
mobile configurations. When designing the module and the linkage arm, the length of the 
module and the arm are strictly constrained to realize a trim figuration. The longitudinal 
dimension is designed in scale while the lateral dimension is free to some extent. The 
geometrical relationships in longitudinal direction shown in Figure 3 are given by 

la = h + h 

(i) 

where l a is the length of the module body, h is the length of the link arm, and l c is the 
distance between Yaw joint to the front or the back side of the module body as shown in 
Figure 3(a). 

430 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Module A / 

(? k III Pitch 

Yaw joint ijA f f^\ joint 

^—s I ink arm ^ 

± 

Module 
B 

£,=07 

(a) 

Module A 
= 1 

&~~ J (^) 6> P =0°\ 

Module B 

1 

Module A 

Y =180° 

(c) <s> w (b) 

Fig. 3. Geometrical relationship of the link- type structures 

3. The prototype of AMOEBA-I 

3.1 Mechanical structure of AMOEBA-I 

According to the principle mentioned above, a three-module robot AMOEBA-I has been 
developed. A single-module is mainly composed of a link arm, a track driving system, an 
offset Yaw joint driving system, a Pitch joint driving system. The module in Figure 4 is a 
standard one. There are often two or more wheels to support the track in the traditional 
track device. One of them is an active wheel and the others are passive. A modification is 
made on the wheel system as shown in Figure 4. First, we only use two wheels in the 
driving system. Second, the wheels are hollow inside. Such kind of wheel is light in mass. 
Moreover, it is possible for application of the system in water for its hollow body and lager 
volume. It has been taken into consideration that if the system is water proof, the robot can 
move both on land and in water like an amphibian vehicle. It has three DC motors which are 
for the track-driving, for pitch joint, and for yaw joint respectively. The motors are packed in 
the center box. Chain transmission device has been used in pitch joint and track's driving, 
while the yaw joint uses bevel gear pairs. Timing pulleys are used to driving the wheels 
forwards and backwards. The link arm and the link handle are used to connect and 
disconnect the adjacent modules. As shown in Figure 5, AMOEBA-I is repetitively 
composed of such kind module. It is a tracked robot which can overpass various terrains by 
transforming its configurations. The key advantage of this type over other link- type vehicle 
is its adaptability to environments through various configurations as shown in Figure 6. 

A-B Autonomy of A Shape-shifting Robot "AMOEBA-I" for USAR 

431 

a. Pitch joint potentiometer; b. Link arm; c. Pitch joint chain driving; d. track wheel; e. Pitch joint motor; 
f. Motor controller; g. Motor drive; h. Yaw joint potentiometer; i. Yaw joint bevel gear driving; j. Track 
driving motor; k. Yaw joint motor; 1. Track wheel chain driving; m. Track 

Fig. 4. Structure of a single standard module of the prototype 

Yaw Joint 

Yaw Joint 

Link 

arm 

B 

Pitch Joint 
(a) 

T 

Link 

arm 

, Pitch Joint 

a. Module C; b. Pitch joint of Module C; c. Link arm between Module B and Module C; d. Yaw joint of 
Module B; e. Module B; f. Autonomous control system; g. Pitch joint of Module B; h. Module C; i. Yaw 
joint of Module A; j. Link arm between Module A and Module B. (b) 

Fig. 5. Structure of AMOEBA-I 

432 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

AMOEBA-I has 9 kinds of available mobile configurations (Liu et al, 2007b). And it has three 
kinds of symmetry configurations: the line type (a), the triangle type (e) and the row type (i). 
The robot may change its configuration to adapt the various environment and tasks. Each 
configuration has various gaits and dimensions. The characteristics of AMOEBA-I can be 
generalized as: 

(1) They have many non-isomorphic configurations. Their configuration can change 
automatically to adapt to the environment. With two or more modules, they can 
pose line type and row type easily. For instance they can pass the narrow space and 
the hole in line and they can move on uneven terrain safely or steering easily in 
row. 

(2) It is small, lightweight and easy to carry. And it can resist against dust, gas and 
other hostile environment. 

(3) With hollow wheels and sealed body, it can move in shallow water. The wheel has 
been designed to be hollow inside for underwater case. 

(4) It is modularized and reconfigurable. The modular robot has satisfied maintenance 
and interchangeableness. It is reconfigurable in urgent need. The connection and 
disconnection of the modules can be finished through the link arm and the link 
handle. 

(g) 

Fig. 6. Available configurations of AMOEBA-I 

A-B Autonomy of A Shape-shifting Robot "AMOEBA-I" for USAR 

433 

3.2 Structure of the control system 

The control system is composed of a wireless module, a main control module, motor control 
modules and sensor-based feedback control modules. It adopts PC-and-MCU structure as 
shown in Figure 7. Modularized structure has been widely used in the control system of 
mobile robots to enhance the error tolerance. As shown in Figure 7, the hardware of control 
system for a single module is modularized for improving the error tolerance and 
exchangeable ability of the system. The control system is composed of a supervisor system, 
an autonomous control system, and an actuator system. Each motor control unit of the 
actuator system has a microprocessor to deal with the information and control command of 
the motors and sensors. To exchange data among micro-controllers, the robot needs a simple 
and high efficient bus to serve as the system bus. CAN bus is a kind of shared broadcast 
field bus, in which all the nodes can send and receive message. Error detection, correction, 
and exchange have been implemented by the CAN controller. Thus CAN bus is selected as 
the suitable information bus in control system of AMOEBA-I. The CAN bus bridges the 
information among the three independent modules. 

Wireless 
Communication 

Autonomous control system ^^ ' 7 

\ ^" X i-i t ii-. ^r,^ Carrier / 

\ N^ — Electron compass Inclinometer GPS / 

CAN bus 

o. a. a a 

I ^ L 

™ =41— -It -It — ^E— 

Actuator 
System 

(a) Control system structure 

434 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

a. Camera; b. Electron compass; c. GPS; d. inclinometer; e. Power; f . Main control unit 

(b) Details of the autonomous control system 
Fig. 7. Control system of AMOEBA-I 

Remote control and teleoperation control are required in a search and rescue robot for the 
real tasks since the disaster site is unreachable for the men. The supervisor system and main 
control unit in the control system communicate with each other through the wireless 
communication module. The supervisor system provides enough perception and command 
capabilities to the operator so that one can control the remote robot. The supervisor system 
not only sends the commands to the robot system, but also timely receives the status 
information returned by the robot, which include the configuration, joints angle, and the 
current consumed by the motor. The main unit is the kernel of the autonomous robot 
system. The main control unit is the decision-making unit of the robot, which estimates its 
own position, and status of the environment provided by the sensor-based feedback control 
unit and plans the movement of robot by using corresponding algorithms. Moreover, it is 
also used to globally program the movement of the robot and the change between the 
configurations. The main control unit has been designed and equipped in each mechanical 
module to implement its global modularization. It is also a communication interface 
between the robot and human-supervision platform by transmitting data from sensors to 
human-supervision platform through wireless communication module. The main control 
unit links all the dispersive motor control units, which are designed in the same method in 
order to implement the modularization of control system. It makes the whole system more 
extendable and stable. The main control unit and pinhole camera are placed in the control 
platform of middle module of AMOEBA-I. The motor control units implement the control 
for mechanical components in AMOEBA-I. All motor control units have the same structure, 
which receive the commands from the main control unit. After analysis and computation, 
actuators are set to a predefined position and rotational speed by using serial ports. When 
one module fails, it would be selected out of the whole control system to keep the system 
robust. The motor control unit is composed of the Fujitsu MCU, the CAN bus driver, the 
potentiometer, the DC motor and the DC controller. The motor control units collect each 
joint's angle form the A/D transformer in the MCU and then transfer it to main controller 
unit, which will help the main control unit plan the system globally. 

The sensor system contains a camera, an inclinometer, an electron compass, and a GPS. It 
receives information from the environment and transmits the data to respective controllers in 
which pre-settled algorithms are used to deal with them, and then results are sent to the MCU. 

A-B Autonomy of A Shape-shifting Robot "AMOEBA-I" for USAR 

435 

4. A-B autonomy of AMOEBA-I 

4.1 A-B autonomy with various configurations 

A-B autonomy or A-B mobility is the key autonomous capability for unmanned system 
(Army Science Board, 2002; Research Council of the National Academies Technology, 2002; 
Quek, 2005). It is also absolutely important for urban search and rescue robots. When in 
rescue operations, the robots are usually arranged to arrive a designated place to search the 
survivals and/ or reconnoitre the environments. When in AMOEBA-Fs A-B autonomy 
consideration, AMOEBA-I can overpass various terrains by transforming its configurations. 
Figure 8 provide a conceptual layout of AMOEBA-Fs A-B autonomy with comparison of 
various configurations. Path d, Path c, and Path a denote the robot's best available route in 
Row configuration, Line configuration or Triangle configurations respectively. However, 
AMOEBA-I maybe have a most-best route Path b with compound configurations which 
considered being shorter and/ or safer. 

m 

Obstacle 

o 

Uneven Terrain 

o 

Reconfiguration 

In Row 
In Line 
In Triangle 
Compound 

Starting point A 

® 

End point B 

Fig. 8. A-B autonomy of AMOEBA-I with various configurations 

When AMOEBA-I moves automatically in the unstructured environment, it must use the 
sensors to know the environment, and then select the optimal configuration according to the 
environment. So knowledge about the performance differences for various configurations 
and the rules of autonomous shape-shifting are very important for AMOEBA-I in its A-B 
autonomy. 

436 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

4.2 Comparison of motion performances of AMOEBA-I 

In order to constitute the rules of autonomous shape-shifting for AMOEBA-I, we test the 
adaptability of AMOEBA-I in symmetrical configurations as shown in Figure 9. 

(a) Experiments under indoor environments 

(b) Experiments under outdoor environments 
Fig. 9. Experiments for the adaptability of AMOEBA-I 

We have gotten the performances of AMOEBA-I by the experiment results as shown in 
Table 1. 

Environment type 

Line 
configuration 

Triangle 
configuration 

Row 
configuration 

Uneven outdoors ground 

II 

I 

III 

Obstacles 

I 

II 

III 

Slopes 

I 

II 

III 

Stairs 

I 

II 

III 

Flat ground 

III 

II 

I 

Turning 

III 

II 

I 

Long and narrow spaces 

I 

III 

II 

Table 1. Motion performances of three symmetrical configurations 

In Table 1, "I", "II" and "III" stand for three levels as "good", "common" and "poor", 
respectively. From Table II we can get conclusions as follows: The robot can climb up 
obstacles with satisfying performance as well as get across cabined spaces under Line 

A-B Autonomy of A Shape-shifting Robot "AMOEBA-I" for USAR 437 

configuration, which is a remarkable improvement for environment-adaptation. In Triangle 
configuration, stability and the mobility of climbing slopes are very notable. Zero-radius 
turning can be realized easily under Row configuration which makes it be more agilely and 
be minimum energy consumed. 

4.3 Rules of autonomous shape-shifting in A-B autonomy 

Since the robot mostly moves on flat ground, we choose Row configuration as the initial 
configuration. The robot takes the following methods to recognize different environments 
and adopts the most appropriate configuration. Here we will take the field, obstacle and 
slopes as examples respectively to show our rules of how to guide the robot to change its 
configuration. 

(1) Environments of uneven ground in the field. In this situation, data from the 
inclinometer are taken as the most important into consideration. If the obliquity 
does not exceed the threshold of 10 degrees, we define the ground as general 
uneven ground. The states fall into 2 kinds according to the specific feedback from 
inclinometer. 

a. The slope's gradient changes not fast (if mean square errors are smaller 
than 20 with 10 times' continuously samplings), then the ground is 
thought to be flat and Row configuration is taken. 

b. The slope's gradient changes rapidly (if mean square errors exceed 20 
with 10 times' continuously samplings), then the ground is thought to be 
uneven, and the robot takes the Triangle configuration. 

(2) Environments of obstacles. When obstacles are in its way, the robot is in one of the 
three following configurations. Configuration changing is decided upon the 
feedback information from encoder and the motor currents. 

a. Row configuration. If data from motor encoder does not change in 10 
seconds, and electric current value steps to a high level, we can conclude 
that the robot has some obstacles in its way and it cannot get over, so the 
robot changes into Triangle configuration. Otherwise, keep in current 
configuration and move on. 

b. Triangle configuration. If data from encoder does not change in 10 
seconds, and current value steps to a high level, we can conclude that the 
robot meets some large obstacles hard to pass. In such case, the 
configuration alters into Line form. Otherwise, keep in current 
configuration and move on. 

c. Line configuration. If data from encoder does not change in 10 seconds 
and current value steps to a high level, which means large obstacles are in 
the way and the robot has to avoid them with utilizing information from 
electron compass and encoder. Otherwise, keep in current configuration 
and move on. 

(3) Environments of slopes. Information from the inclinometer is at the first place to be 
considered when the robot gets over obstacles with certain gradients. The strategy 
of its locomotion is illuminated as: 

a. The gradients range in [0, 10°]: In this situation, there is no need to alter 
the robot's configuration. 

438 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

b. The gradients range in [10°, 20°]: Triangle configuration which is prone to 
get over obstacles and has good stability is available. 

c. The gradients range in [20°, 30°]: Take Line configuration for the robot 
may overcome tough obstacles in this kind. 

d. The gradients exceed 30°: Steer clear of the slopes using data from electron 
compass and encoder. 

In a word, the robot can judge its surroundings accurately by analyzing data from sensors. 
Moreover, it can take different configurations to adapt to the environment and complete the 
designated mission. 

4.4 GPS based autonomous navigation 

We used GPS to provide geographic coordinates. Some calculation should be done to get the 
robot's present position and the difference between its present and target position. Set these 
differences as the norm angles of electron compass, the robot will move towards target 
position. As is shown in Figure 10, O is set to be the mobile robot's initial position, whose 
geodetic coordinates are (Lo, Bo), and P is the target position with its geodetic coordinates at 
(Lp, Bp). The dashed circle is the confines of the range in which the robot may stop at the 
range of allowable error. After the robot covers a certain distance, it stops at A (La, Ba) to 
adjust its orientation. As it passed B (Lb, Bb), it enters GPS blind zone. At C, the robot makes 
its orientation adjustment utilizing geodetic coordinates according to information of inertial 
components. The robot leaves GPS blind zone from the moment it gets to D (Ld, Bb). 
Suppose it meets an obstacle at E, the navigation program will stop and a program of 
obstacle-get-over or obstacle-avoidance will take charge until it gets over or passes by the 
obstacle. The robot changes its configuration at F and alters into its former shape at G {Lg, 
Bg). In this graph, H (Lh, Bh) is its end point. 

Actual end point ] 

Ideal end point P 

Fig. 10. Autonomous navigation of AMOEBA-I 

A-B Autonomy of A Shape-shifting Robot "AMOEBA-I" for USAR 439 

After we select an end point, OP's direction represented by a can be ascertained. 

Lp — Lq 

Bp — B( 

cos B (2) 

The electron compass gives the robot's deflexion angle y (the angle to Y axis) at its initial 
position. Therefore, at the beginning, the robot has to turn 0, which can be calculated by 

9 = oc-j (3) 

If >0, it turns left, while it turns right if 0<O, otherwise it goes straightforward. Suppose the 

robot reaches a where GPS fails after certain periods (the interval between the robot samples 

the GPS values), it starts to calculate its position and orientation using the record of inertia 

components. 

After one period, the robot moves to B, whose geodetic coordinates can be calculated by 

vt cos 7 

Bb = b a + -^-1 (4) 

B = A + ~kT~ (5) 

In Eqs. (3) and (4), v is the velocity of robot, y represents its including angle to Y axis and t is 
its motion period. Ki is chosen to be 30.8m/ s, which is the distance between the adjacent 
latitude divided by minutes along the same longitude. 

K 2 = K 1 cosB A (6) 

where K2 in Eq.(5) denotes the distance along BA latitude between every one minute 
longitudes. Whether it turns left or right can be concluded by Eqs. (2) and (3). Therefore, 
even if GPS system cannot receive the satellites' signals, orientation program by inertia 
components is automatically performed, in which data from the encoder, electron compass 
and inclinometer together with the previous GPS's information are used to conclude the 
robot's present geodetic coordinates to make sure its navigation works correctly. When it 
gets out of the blind zone, GPS system starts to work for the robot's orientation. E-F-G is the 
path followed by the robot when it gets over the obstacles after shape-shifting or round the 
obstacle directly. In this process, the robot checks the obstacles first. If the obstacle is too 
tough to get over, obstacle-avoidance program runs to make the robot pass by the obstacle. 
If it founds that the obstacle can be got over after shape-shifting, it will withdraw a certain 
distance and change into a more appropriate configuration. After getting over the obstacle, 
the robot will take a more efficient configuration, reorient itself and move towards the 
target. 

In addition, the robot checks whether it reaches the target position every period by 
calculating the distance between its position and the target. Suppose that the robot's present 
position is C (Lq Bq), then the distance to the target position P can be gotten by 

440 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

L = ^(Ki(B P - B C )) 2 + (K 2 (L P - L C )) 2 

(7) 

As a measurement error lies in GPS system, the distance from P to C signed as L cannot be 
simply used to decide whether the robot has reached its target. If L's error lies at a tolerable 
range, the robot is thought to be get to the aim point; If not, then we let C replace B, 
recalculate a and do the conclusion and analysis that has been illuminated in the above 
paragraphs until we get an L that meets the error tolerance. 

5. Autonomous motion experiments 

Autonomous navigation experiments free of obstacles as well as experiments in the 
environment where the robot has to reshape itself to get over the small obstacles have been 
made with AMOEBA-I. 

5.1 Experiment system and experimental field 

The experiment system include one console and one AMOEBA-I. The experiment system 
and Experimental field to validate the autonomous navigation and shape-shifting algorithm 
are shown in Figure 11. 

Fig. 11. Experiment system 

5.2 Autonomous motion in the no-obstacle situation 

AMOEBA-I has moved automatically from starting point to end point on the lawn. There is 
no-obstacle situation in the way that AMOEBA-I move on. Process of autonomous motion is 
shown in Figure 12. 

A-B Autonomy of A Shape-shifting Robot "AMOEBA-I" for USAR 

441 

7^ 1 

£ ■ i N 1 I 

s IBM 

T 

fifel Starting 
-Ar point 

>oint 
(a) 

poir 

"Ti 

it 1 

(d.l 

[^Starting 

Fig. 12. Autonomous motion of AMOEBA-I in the no-obstacle situation 

In the experiment, we set the target position at 41°45.6950'N/123°26.5642 r E. 

Figure 12 (a) shows the robot's orientation before the aim point was set, with its position at 

41°45.6945 r N/3°26.5345 r E measured by GPS devices and the electron compass read 135 

degrees. 

Figure 12 (b) shows that after the aim point were set, the robot adjusted itself to face the 

target. 

Figure 12 (c) shows one of the several adjustments on the way caused by the errors of GPS 

(<15m) and electron compass (-30-30). 

Figure 12 (d) shows the robot stopped near the target at 41°45.6948 r N/123°26.5340 , E. 

5.3 Autonomous motion in the small obstacle situation 

The process of robot's autonomous navigation and autonomous shape-shifting is shown in 

Figure 13. Each step's motion is introduced as follows. 

Figure 13(a): AMOEBA-I is located at the starting point. 

Figure 13(b): After climbing obstacles, AMOEBA-I detected that Row configuration cannot 

cross. 

Figure 13(c) and Figure 13(d): it returns and changes into the Triangle configuration with 

stronger ability to cross the obstacle. 

Figure 13(e): The process of AMOEBA-I with Triangle configuration cross the obstacle. 

Figure 13(f), Figure 13(g) and Figure 13(h): AMOEBA-I detected that the ground slope<10°, 

it turn back into Row configuration with good turning ability. 

Figure 13 (i): The point at which AMOEBA-I adjust its orientation. 

Figure 13 (j): AMOEBA-I arrives at target point and completes the process of autonomous 

navigation. 

As the experimental results show, in the process of autonomous motion, when AMOEBA-I 

encountered a vertical obstruction or obstacle with small slope and angle, it can make a 

reaction in time and automatically change into other configuration with strong ability to 

climb up obstacle directly and approximate the target point. 

442 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 13. Autonomous motion of AMOEBA-I in the obstacle situation 

6. Conclusion 

The frequent nature disasters and man-made catastrophes during the last decades such as 
earthquake, typhoon, hurricane, radiation and terrorist attack have greatly aroused people's 
attention on the importance of Urban Search and Rescue (USAR). In some extremely 
dangerous catastrophes, the rescue staffs are eager to know the inner situation while they 
cannot perform an in-depth reconnaissance. Robots are emergently needed for tactical 
search and rescue, which covers how the field teams actually find, support, and extract 
survivors. AMOEBA-I, a three-module shape-shifting robot with nine configurations from 
Shenyang Institute of Automation (SIA), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), has been 
developed for such cases. In this research we mainly focused on the A-B autonomy of 
AMOEBA-I. With global considerations of the shape-shifting robot and its locomotion 
environments, this chapter presented a multi-sensor-based autonomous control system for 
the robot "AMOEBA-I" to move outdoors. With the advantages of various configurations, 

A-B Autonomy of A Shape-shifting Robot "AMOEBA-I" for USAR 443 

AMOEBA-I has high flexibility under unstructured environments. When AMOEBA-I moves 
in autonomous mode, it can use its sensors to know about the environment, and then select 
the optimal configuration to achieve an A-B autonomy mission. Experiments have been 
mainly executed to validate the effectiveness of the system. Since the urban search and 
rescue environments are usually unstructured and unpredictable, we believe that the shape 
changing should be an ideal solution to improve the rescue robot's mobility, flexibility, and 
adaptability. This research result provides a fundamental approach for robot's possible 
operation in more complex environments. 

7. Acknowledgement 

This research is supported partly by the National Natural Science Foundation of China 
(Grant No. 60705029), the National High-Technology 863 Program (Grant Nos. 
2006AA04Z254, 2007AA041502-5), Doctoral Startup Foundation of Liaoning Province and 
State Key Laboratory of Robotics foundation (Grant No. RLO200813). 

8. References 

Army Science Board (2002). Ad Hoc Study on Human Robot Interface Issues: Final Report, 

Virginia Blackburn, M.; Bailey, R. & Lytle, B. (2004). Improved mobility in a 

multi-degree-of-freedom unmanned ground vehicle. Proceedings of SPIE, Vol. 5422, 

pp. 124-134 
Casper, J. & Murphy, R. (2003). Human-robot interaction during the robot-assisted urban 

search and rescue response at the world trade center. IEEE Transaction on System, 

Man, and Cybernetics, Part B: Cybernetics, Vol. 33, No. 3, pp. 367-383 
Erkmen, I.; Erkmen, A. M.; Matsuno, F.; Chatterjee, R. & Kamegawa T. (2002). Snake robots 

to the rescue. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 17-25 
Hirose, S & Fukushima, E. (2002). Development of mobile robots for rescue operations. 

Advanced Robotics, Vol. 16, No. 6, pp. 509-112 
Huang, B.; Li, M. & Sun, L.(2006) The research of a parent-children type robot system. 

Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics, pp. 977-981 
Li, B.; Ma S.; Liu, J. & Wang, Y. (2006). AMOEBA-I: an improved link-type shape shifting 

modular robot for search and rescue operation. Proceedings of IEEE International 

Workshop on Safety, Security, and Rescue Robotics 
Lim, S.; Park, D.; Kwak, Y.; Kim, B. & Jeon, S. (2005). Variable geometry single-tracked 

mechanism for a rescue robot. Proceedings of IEEE International Workshop on Safety, 

Security, and Rescue Robotics, pp. 111-115 
Liu, J.; Wang, Y.; Li, B. & Ma S. (2004). Link-type shape shifting modular robot for search 

and rescue. High Technology Letters, Vol. 10, sup, pp. 179-183 
Liu, J.; Wang, Y.; Li, B. & Ma S. (2007a). Current research, key performance and future 

development of search and rescue robot. Frontiers of Mechanical Engineering in 

China, Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 404-416 
Liu, J.; Wang, Y.; Li, B.; Ma S. & Tan, D. (2007b). Center-configuration selection technique for 

the reconfigurable modular robot. Science in China Series F-Information Sciences, Vol. 

50, No. 5, pp. 697-710 

444 Climbing and Walking Robots 

Matsuno, F. & Tadokoro, S. (2004). Rescue Robots and Systems in Japan. Proceedings of IEEE 

International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics, pp. 12-20 
Murphy, R. (2002). Marsupial and shape-shifting robots for urban search and rescue. IEEE 

Intelligent Systems, Vol. 20, No. 3/4, pp. 14-20 
Murphy, R.; Tadokoro, S.; Nardi, D.; Jacoff, A.; Fiorini, P.; Choset, H. & Erkmen, A. (2007). 

Search and Rescue Robotics, in: Springer Handbook of Robotics, B. Siciliano et al. (Ed.), 

pp. 1151-1173, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin 
Osuka, K. & Kitajima, H. (2003). Development of Mobile Inspection Robot for Rescue 

Activities: MOIRA. Proceedings of IEEE/RS] International Conference on Intelligent 

Robots and Systems, pp. 3373-3377 
Quek, B.K.; Ibanez-Guzman, J. & Lim, K.W. (2005). Feature-based perception for 

autonomous unmanned navigation. Proceedings of 31 st Annual Conference of IEEE 

Industrial Electronics IECON, pp. 1791-1796 
Research Council of the National Academies Technology (2002). Development for Army 

Unmanned Ground Vehicles, The National Academic Press, Washington D.C. 
Tabata, K.; Inaba, A. & Amano, H. (2005). Development of a transformational mobile robot 

to search victims under debris and rubble -2nd report: improvement of mechanism 

and interface. Proceedings of IEEE International Workshop on Safety, Security, and 

Rescue Robotics, pp. 19-24 
Tetsushi, K.; Yamasaki, T.; Igarashi, H. & Matsuno, F. (2004). Development of the snake-like 

rescue robot "KOHGA". Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Robotics and Automation, 

pp. 5081-5086 
Wolf, A.; Brown, H.; Casciola, R.; Costa, A.; Schwerin, M.; Shamas, E. & Choset, H. (2003). A 

mobile hyper redundant mechanism for search and rescue tasks. Proceedings of 

IEEE/RS] International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 2889-2895 
Zhang, H.; Wang, W.; Den, Z.; Zong, G & Zhang, J. (2006). A novel reconfigurable robot for 

urban search and rescue. International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems, Vol. 3, 

No. 4, pp. 359-366 
Zou, D.; Wang, T. & Liang, J. (2006). Reconfiguration research on modular mobile robot. 

Proceedings of IEEE/RS] International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 

1082-1085 

26 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: 
Control system design and 
Walking pattern generation 

Mario Arbulu, Dmitry Kaynov and Carlos Balaguer 

Robotics lab, Department of Systems and Automation Engineering 

University Carlos III of Madrid 
Spain 

1. Introduction 

Since industrial robots cannot be easily adapted to assist human activities in everyday 
environments such as in hospitals, homes, offices, there is a growing need for robots that can 
interact with a person in a human-like manner. Wheel robots sometimes cannot be used in 
such kinds of environments because of the obvious restrictions posed by the use of wheels. 
For example, it is impossible for this kind of robot to go downstairs and upstairs or to clear 
some obstacles on the floor. What is more, humanoid robots are expected to play a more 
important role in the future. 

One of the most exciting challenges that has faced the engineering community in recent 
decades was obtaining a machine of a similar form, a humanoid robot, that could do the 
same activities as a human being in addition to walking in the same manner (such as 
HONDA robots, Hirai et al. 1998; HRP robots, Kaneko et al. 2002, 2008; Johnnie, Loeffler et 
al.; LOLA, Lohmeier et al. 2006.) 

There are several reasons to construct a robot with these characteristics. Humanoid robots 
will work in a human atmosphere with greater effectiveness than any other type of robots 
because the great majority of environments where they would interact reciprocally with a 
human are constructed, taking into account the dimensions of the latter. If it is supposed 
that a machine should complete dangerous tasks or work in extreme conditions, in the ideal 
case its anthropometric measures must be as close as possible to the ones of its prototype. 
Inclusively, there are professionals who adduce that for a human being to interact naturally 
with a machine, it must look like him. 

The main goal of this project is the development of a reduced weight human size robot 
which can be a reliable humanoid platform for implementing different control algorithms, 
human interaction, etc. 

The main assumption for the mechanical design started with the weight of a 1.20 m person 
and the desired walking motion of the humanoid robot. With these, the requirements for 
each joint's torque were calculated and then, by dynamical analysis, the structure was 
designed and the dimensions of the motors were determined. It was an iterative process for 

446 Climbing and Walking Robots 

obtaining the optimal torques which allows the anthropometrical walking of a 1.45m 
human. 

Nowadays, the development of humanoid robots has become a very active area. However, it 
is still limited by the very high cost of maintenance and development. 

The main parts of the hardware of the humanoid robot are the "custom-built" components. 
The software also does not have any standardization or common rules for the humanoid 
robot's programming. It implies the growth of usage of some technologies from the 
industrial automation field in humanoid robotics because of their low cost and reliability. 
The control system of the Rh-1 robot was designed using the conventional electronic 
components of the automation industry in order to reduce the development time and cost 
and to have a flexible and easily upgradeable hardware system. 

While generating walking patterns we can compute joint angular speed, acceleration and 
torque ranges (Arbulu et al. 2005 and Stramiglioli et al. 2002). There are two methods for 
designing gait patterns: The distributed mass model and the concentrated mass model. In 
our case, the concentrated mass model is used because the humanoid dynamics is simplified 
significantly (Kajita et al. 2003, Gienger et al. 2001). In order to obtain a natural and stable 
gait, the 3D-LIPM method is used, where the pendulum mass motion is constrained to move 
along an arbitrarily defined plane. This analysis leads us to a simple linear dynamics: the 
Three dimensional Linear Inverted Pendulum Mode (3D-LIPM, Kajita et al. 2003). 
Furthermore, the sagital and frontal motion can be studied in separate planes (Raibert 1986, 
Arbulu et al. 2006). The 3D-LIPM takes into account that the pendulum ball moves like a 
free ball in a plane following the inverted pendulum laws in the gravity field, so the ball 
motion has only three parameters: gravity, the plane position and the ball position. This 
model is applicable only during the single support phase. Another mass concentrated model 
is used, which is the Cart-table model (Kajita et. al. 2003), implemented in order to improve 
the walking patterns because the ZMP position can be predicted and a closer relationship 
with the COG is obtained. Smooth patterns by optimizing jerk are obtained; this will be seen 
in successful experiments. In order to apply the obtained trajectory to the humanoid robot 
Rh-1, the ball or cart motion drives the middle of the hip link. The foot trajectories are 
computed by single splines, taking into account foot position and orientation and the 
landing speed of each foot to keep the humanoid from falling down. Several direction 
patterns will be computed. Some simulation experiments have been done using a 21 DOF 
VRML robot model. 

Then, using the Lie-logic method, the inverse kinematics problem for the entire robot body 
was solved and the trajectory vectors for each joint were obtained (Paden et. al. 1986). These 
trajectories are used as reference calculated motion patterns and denote feet, arms and the 
entire body trajectory of the robot. 

An industrial robot usually operates in a well defined environment executing pre- 
programmed tasks or movement patterns. In the same way, the first approaches to make a 
humanoid robot walk (Shin et al. 1990) were based on the generation of stable offline 
patterns according to the ZMP (Zero Moment Point) concept (Vukobratovic et al. 1969). In 
contrast to industrial robots, a humanoid robot will interact with a person in a continuously 
changing workspace. Therefore, the use of only static motion patterns for the humanoid 
robot interaction is insufficient. 

The other method is a real-time control, based on sensor information (Furusho et al. 1990 
and Fujimoto et al. 1998). This approach requires a large amount of computing and 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 447 

communication resources and sometimes it is not suitable for a humanoid robot with a high 

number of joints. 

A humanoid robot can walk smoothly if it has previously defined walking patterns and an 

ability to react adequately to the disturbances caused by imperfections in its mechanical 

structure and irregular terrain properties. Previous works (Park et al. 2000 and Quang et al. 

2000), rarely considered and published the detailed architecture for the online modification 

of dynamic motion patterns. 

And finally, a new humanoid platform Rh-1 (Fig. 1) was constructed and successfully tested 

in a series of walking experiments. 

Fig. 1. Rh-1 humanoid robot 

This paper presents the control architecture which combines use of the previously offline 
calculated motion patterns with online modifications for dynamic humanoid robot walking. 

The main contributions of this work are: 

- Validation of the novel approach for walking pattern generation: Local Axis Gait 
Algorithm (LAG). It permits walking in any direction and on an uneven surface (i.e. ramp, 
stairs). 

- Implementation and validation of the use of screws provide a very geometric description 
of rigid motion, so the analysis of the mechanism is greatly simplified; furthermore, it is 
possible to carry out the same mathematical treatment for the different robot joints: revolute 
and prismatic. 

- Development of hardware and software control architecture for the humanoid robot Rh-1. 
This allows us to obtain a more flexible and adaptable system capable of changing its 
properties according to user needs. Proposed hardware architecture is a novel solution for 
the area of humanoid robots that complies with modern tendencies in robotics. Software 

448 Climbing and Walking Robots 

architecture providing the robot with a standard functionality is easily upgraded and can 
use new one. 

- Definition of purpose and validation of kinematics modelling of humanoids robots using 
screw theory and Paden-Kahan sub-problems, which have the following advantages: 

They avoid singularities because they offer a global description of rigid body 
motion; we only need to define two frames (base and tool) and the rotation axis of 
each DOF, to analyze the kinematics in a closed way. 

The Paden-Kahan sub problems allows for computing the inverse kinematics at 
position level. 

There is a faster computation time of the inverse kinematics with respect to the 
inverse Jacobean method, Euler angles or D-H parameters, so it contributes to real- 
time applications. 

- Implementation and validation of the inverted pendulum and cart-table-based walking 
patterns for any humanoid robot, under the LAG algorithm. 

- Development of new efficient algorithms for joint motion control and stabilization of the 
humanoid robot gait. These algorithms provide simple solutions allowing for fast and 
reliable integral control of a robot. 

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 deals with the human biomechanics study. 
Sections 3, 4 and 5 consider hardware, software and communication infrastructures of the 
humanoid robot Rh-1. Then, the section 6 presents walking pattern generation and some 
simulations results. Section 7 considers the control architecture implemented in order to 
control the robot's motion and stability. Experimental results will be shown in section 8. 
And finally, Section 9 presents conclusions of this work. 

2. Biomechanics 

2.1 Outline 

The humanoid design starts from its motion requirements, so dimensions, joint range 
motion, joint velocities, forces and wrench should be studied. After that, the link design can 
start. This first humanoid robot prototype deals with the study of locomotion, so human 
locomotion will be analyzed. First, human biomechanics anthropometry is studied; next, 
human walking motion is analyzed. 

2.2 Kinematics 

The term used for these descriptions of human movement is kinematics. Kinematics is not 
concerned with the forces, either internal or external, which cause the movement, but rather 
with the details of the movement itself. In order to keep track of all the kinematic variables, 
it is important to establish a convention system. Thus if we wish to analyze movement 
relative to the ground or the direction of gravity, we must establish a spatial reference 
system (Fig. 2). 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

449 

Lateral 

Medial 

Ventral 

Fig. 2. Human motion planes, © NASA 

Lateral 
Dorsal 

Cranial 

Caudal 

2.3 Human locomotion 

For dividing the gait cycle in many stages or events, some considerations are taken into 
account such as the fact that the gait cycle is the period of time between any two identical 
events in the walking cycle (Ayyappa, E. 1997). As the gait cycle could be divided into 
events and the continuity between each of them must be maintained, any event could be 
selected as the starting of the gait cycle (that is in the ideal case because the terrain 
imperfections and human postures make gait cycle not periodic, see Fig. 3). So, the starting 
and finishing event are called the initial contact respectively. Otherwise, the gait stride is 
defined as the distance between two initial contacts of one foot. 

The stance and swing are the events of the gait cycle. Stance is the event when the foot is in 
contact with the ground, (around 60 percent of the gait cycle). Swing is the event when the 
foot is in the air, (around 40 percent of the gait cycle). 

2.4 Anthropomorphic human dimensions, volume and weight distribution 

Human dimensions are taken into account as a reference because their proportions allow for 
stable walking and optimal distribution of the forces actuating while a human is walking. 
Biomechanics give us the relationship between human height and each link (Fig. 4, Winter, 
D. 1990), as well as in the same way as the mass. 

450 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

mm 

Initial 
Double Limb 

Single Limb 

Stance 
Stance right 
Swing left 

Double Limb 

Swing 

Swing right 
Stance left 

Double Limb 

Stance 

Fig. 3. The gait cycle has two phases: about 60-percent stance phase and about 40-percent 
swing phase with two periods of double support which occupy a total of 25 to 30 percent of 
the gait cycle. 

■ H^^l O.I30H 

A Q _1° 10ai N 

i-i 

A 

JL± 

L. 

0S2OH 

J 

-J L- 

0.530H 

I 1 

H-OJ52I+H 
Foot itftqih 

Fig. 4. Anthropomorphic human dimensions, © Winter, D. 

2.5 Human walking trajectories 

Human walking motion is studied in order to analyze the right motion of each link and joint 
during the step. The swing leg and hip motions must assure stable walking in any direction 
and speed. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

451 

The joint angular evolution during a walk should be measured with the appropriate devices, 
or by introducing the swing leg and hip trajectories as inputs of a kinematic model. For the 
humanoid robot, the joint angular evolution is the input for walking. The human swing foot 
normally falls to the ground when walking, while for a humanoid robot this must be 
avoided in order to protect the robot structure and force sensors of the soles. Thus, the 
adequate walking pattern should be generated for the COG and the swing foot. Normally, 
the human COG follows the laws of the inverted pendulum in the field of gravity during the 
walking motion, which is a hyperbolic orbit. It is suitable for making a smooth walking 
motion at the jerk level. However, the humanoid robot's swing foot motion should be faster 
than the human one in order not to fall while walking. 

2000- 

1800 

1600- 

Human leg motion while walking 

kn P ee 

Fig. 5. Human leg motion, Sagital view. 

Human leg motion while walking 

500 
450 
400 
350 
300 

hip 

II- 

Fig. 6. Human leg motion, Top view. 

Figures 5 and 6 show the leg motion and the hip, knee and feet trajectories (including the 
ankle, toe and heel). The hip trajectory is quite similar to the COG trajectory. In the sagital 
view, that trajectory climbs and descends cyclically. The falling motion increases the sole 

452 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

reaction force, so in the humanoid robot, it is better to have a motion on a horizontal plane; 
furthermore, the trajectory shape looks like the inverted pendulum motion (top view, Fig. 
6), so we could approximate the humanoid robot in this way. 

3. Hardware Architecture 

The hardware architecture for the humanoid robot has some important restrictions imposed 
by the limited availability of space. In general, the basic requirements for hardware 
architecture of a humanoid robot are: scalability, modularity and standardized interfaces 
(Regenstein et. al. 2003). In the case of the Rh-1 robot with 21 DOF, which supposes the use 
of 21 DC motors in synchronized high-performance multi-axis application, it is first 
necessary to choose an appropriate control approach. The trend of modern control 
automation is toward distributed control. It is driven by one basic concept: by reducing 
wiring, costs can be lowered and reliability increased. Therefore, an electrical design of Rh-1 
robot is based on a distributed motion control philosophy where each control node is an 
independent agent in the network. Figure 7 shows the physical distribution of the hardware 
inside the humanoid robot. 

The architecture presented is provided with a large level of scalability and modularity by 
dividing the control task into Control, Device and Sensory levels (Fig. 8), (Kaynov et al. 
2005). 

The Control level is divided into 3 layers represented as a controller centered on its own 
tasks such as external communications, motion controller's network supervision or general 
control. 

Attitude 

estimation 

sensors 

DC Motors 
Encoder's 

Distributed 

Motion 

Controllers 

Batteries 

Main 
Controller 

Head 
Controller 

Force- 
Torqne 
Sensors 

Fig. 7. Hardware distribution inside the humanoid robot. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

453 

In the Device level each servo drive not only closes the servo loop but calculates and 
performs trajectory online, synchronizes with other devices and can execute different 
movement programs located in its memory. These kinds of devices are located near the 
motors, thus benefiting from less wiring, which is one of the requirements for energy 
efficiency; they are lightweight and require less effort in cabling. Advanced and 
commercially available motion controllers were implemented in order to reduce 
development time and cost. Continuous evolution and improvements in electronics and 
computing have already made it possible to reduce the industrial controller's size to use it in 
the humanoid development project. Furthermore, it has the advantage of applying well 
supported and widely used devices from the industrial control field, and brings the 
commonly used and well supported standards into the humanoid robots development area. 
On the Control level, the Main controller is a commercial PC/ 104+ single board computer 
because of its small size and low energy consumption. It was used instead of a DSP 
controller because it has a different peripheral interface as is the Ethernet and RS-232, and 
an easy programming environment. In addition, there is a great variety of additional 
extension modules as the PC/ 104+ bus like CAN-bus, digital and analog input-output, and 
PCMCIA cards. Selection criteria were fast CPU speed, low consumption and availability of 
expansion interfaces. The Main Controller provides general synchronization, updates 
sensory data, calculates the trajectory and sends it to the servo controllers of each joint. It 
also supervises data transmission for extension boards such as Supervisory Controller and 
ZMP Estimation Controller via PC/104+ bus. 

Fig. 8. Hardware architecture. 

454 Climbing and Walking Robots 

The Communication Supervisory Controller uses a network bus to reliably connect 
distributed intelligent motion controllers with the Main Controller. 

The motion control domain is rather broad. As a consequence, communications standards to 
integrate motion control systems have proliferated. The available communication standards 
cover a wide range of capability and cost ranging from high-speed networked lO 
subsystems standards to distributed communications standards for integrating all machines 
on the shop floor into the wider company. The most appropriate solution to be implemented 
in the humanoid robot motion control system design seems to be the use of CAN-based 
standards. The CAN bus communication is used for the Sensory level and the CANOpen 
protocol on top of the CAN bus is used for the Device level of communications. 
Thus, the control system adopted in the Rh-1 robot is a distributed architecture based on 
CAN bus. The CAN bus has also been chosen because of various characteristics, such as 
bandwidth up to 1 MBit/s that is of sufficient speed to control the axes of a humanoid robot, 
a large number of nodes (Rh-1 has 21 controllable DOF), differential data transmission, 
which is important for reducing the Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) effects caused by 
electric motors, and finally, the possibility for other devices such as sensors to reside in the 
same control network. 

At the Device level, the Controller's network of the Rh-1 is divided into 2 independent CAN 
buses in order to reduce the load of the communication infrastructure. The Lower part bus 
controls 12 nodes of two legs and the Upper part bus controls 10 nodes of two arms and the 
trunk. To unify the data exchange inside the robot, the attitude estimation sensory system is 
also connected to the Upper part CAN bus. In this way, the communication speed of CAN 
bus used in Rh-1 is 1MBit/ s. The synchronization of both parts is realized by the 
Supervisory Controller at the Control level of automation. 

The External Communications module provides the Ethernet communication on the upper 
(Control) level of the automation with head electronics which comprise an independent 
vision and sound processing system. It also provides wireless communications with the 
Remote Client which sends operating commands for the humanoid robot. The proposed 
architecture complies with the industrial automation standards for the design of the motion 
control system. 

4. Software Architecture 

As mentioned above, a humanoid robot can be considered as a plant where the shop floor 
consists of a series of cells (intelligent motion controllers and sensors) managed by 
controllers (the Main Controller, Communication Supervisory Controller, etc.) In general, 
there are two basic control tasks for the control system of a humanoid robot. The first goal is 
to control all automation and supervise data transmission. Meanwhile, the second goal is to 
control and monitor the entire floor in order to detect failures as early as possible, and to 
report on performance indicators. In this context, the humanoid robot Rh-1 is provided with 
a software system allowing the implementation of the industry automation concepts 
(Kaynov et. al. 2007). The software architecture is based on the Server-Client model (Fig. 9). 
For security reasons, the Control Server accepts the connections of other clients, such as the 
Head Client, responsible for the human-robot interaction, only if the Master Client allows it. 
If the connection is accepted, the Master Client only supervises the humanoid robot state 
and data transmission between the robot and other Client, but in the case of any conflict it 
always has top priority. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

455 

Control 
Server 

Wireless 
Communications 

CAN bus 

Control 
Agents 

Master 
Client 

* Client 2 

Client 3 

Fig. 9. System Architecture. 

According to the Server-Client model, the humanoid robot is controlled by the passive 
Server, which waits for requests, and upon their receipt, processes them and then serves 
replies for the Client. On the other hand, the Server controls all Control Agents which reside 
in the CAN bus network. In that case, the Control Server is no longer a slave; it is a network 
master for Control Agents which performs their operations (motion control or sensing) and 
replies for the Server. 

As a PLC in the automation industry, the Control Server is designed and programmed as 
finite state automata. Figure 10 shows the state diagram and Table II shows the state 
transition events of the humanoid robot Control Server functioning 

Two basic types of incoming data are processed. A command is simple data, which can be 
executed by one Control Agent. The order is a complex command which needs the 
simultaneous action of many Control Agents and sensors which the humanoid robot 
possesses. After the connection of the Master Client, the humanoid robot stays in the Client 
Handling state waiting for an order or a simple command. The arrival of an order launches 
the User Program. The User Program is executed in the control area, the core of the 
humanoid robot Control Server software. It performs the data transmission between all 
Control Agents, sensory system and the Server. It performs trajectory execution at the 
synchronized multi-axis walking applications, controls the posture and ZMP errors at the 
dynamic walking mode, and reads the sensors' state, etc. The control area consists of 
different modules which provide the execution of motion control for stable biped 
locomotion of the humanoid robot. All tasks can be grouped by their time requirements. 
The developed software provides the set of the C-based function to work with the robot and 
to generate the user's motions and control procedures that are not only for walking, but also 
for implementing different human-robot cooperation tasks. The code below shows the 
simple user program. The example in Figure 12 shows how the simple humanoid robot 
motion can be programmed. At the beginning, the synchronization procedure for every joint 

456 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

is performed, and then the motion is started. The robot will change the gait (walking mode) 
according to user request. 

Event 

Event Description 

El 

The Client is connected 

E2 

An Order has arrived 

E3 

A Command has arrived 

E4 

A Command is sent to the Control Agent 

E5 

Agent's reply has arrived 

E6 

An Answer is sent to the Client 

E7 

The User Program has successfully terminated or an Error 
Event has occurred 

E8 

Connection with the Client is lost 

E9 

The Robot is staying in the secure position 

E10 

All processes are terminated 

Table 1. State Transition Events 

Fig. 10. Server functioning state diagram. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

457 

In the proposed software architecture, the Control Server is capable of accepting a large 
amount of clients' connections at the same time. It is evident that the Master Client, as the 
basic HMI of the humanoid robot, should provide and supervise the execution of the upper- 
level control tasks related with global motion planning, collision avoidance, and human- 
robot interaction. In general, these tasks are common for all mobile and walking robots and 
the design of these kinds of software systems is not considered in this paper. On the other 
hand, there are some bottom-level tasks that should be supervised such as sensory data 
acquisition, joint synchronization and walking stability control. In order to not overload the 
Master Client, which is more oriented to automation supervisory, these control tasks are 
processed with another client application. To provide the robot Rh-1 with bottom-level 
control, a SCADA system for the humanoid robot, called HRoSCoS (Humanoid Robot 
Supervisory Control System) Client was developed. 

I 

Non real-time 

Client 
Application 

l_ 

Sockets 

Motion 
patterns 

Interpreter 

Model & Pattern 
generator 

Control Area 

Soft real-time 

II 

Hard real-time 

II 
-ill 

Locomotion 
module 

CAN Bus 
& Drivers 

Motion 
control 
Agents 

Fig. 11. Control area modules. 

/.■" Motion program example 
^include "oontrol-h" 
^include "sensor/sir 
^include "dynamic gate.h" 

main (void) 

f 

EnableRobotQ; 
Read JointsPoaltionf }; 
SincromzefK 
if ( StaitO ) 
do 

( 

l^stureControlO; 
DynamicGatefGate 1 ); 
if (Changetiate) 

I 

DynamlcLrate(CratB2 ); 

} 

while (EStopO) 
DisableRobotO; 

Fig. 12. Motion program example. 

458 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

HRoSCoS Client 

HMI 

Trending 

Alarms 
display 

Log 
Display 

Active X 
Controls 

Event Manager 

Data Processing 

Database < ► 

Reports Generation 

C om m unica tions 

Fig. 13. HRoSCoS Client Architecture. 

The developed software system is multi-tasking and the Control Server is also responsible 
for data acquisition and handling (e.g. polling motion controllers, alarm checking, 
calculations, logging and archiving) on a set of parameters when the HRoSCoS Client is 
connected. Figure 13 shows the HRoSCoS Client architecture. 

The Client requires the data or changes control set points by sending commands. The arrival 
of a command launches its execution procedure (the right branch of the Server functioning 
State Diagram in Figure 10). It consists of the interpretation and transmission of the 
Command to a Control Agent. When the answer is received, it is converted and transmitted 
to the HRoSCoS Client to be processed and visualized. 

The HRoSCoS Client provides the trending of different parameters of the robot, such as the 
joint velocities, accelerations, currents, body inclinations, forces and torques which appear 
during humanoid robot walking. Real-time and historical trending is possible, although 
generally not in the same chart. Alarm handling is based on limit and status checking and is 
performed in the Control Server (for example current limit or physical limit of the joint) and 
then the alarm reports are generated into the HRoSCoS Client application. More 
complicated expressions (using arithmetic or logical expressions) are developed by creating 
derived parameters on which status or limit checking is then performed. Logging of data is 
performed only if some value changes. Logged data can be transferred to an archive once 
the log is full. The logged data is time-stamped and can be filtered when viewed by a user. 
In addition, it is possible to generate different reports on the humanoid robot state at any 
time. 

The HRoSCoS Client system presents the information to the operating personnel 
graphically. This means that the operator can observe a representation of the humanoid 
robot being controlled (Fig. 11). 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

459 

M ll fflftHBI 

File Edit Viev-,' Window Display Help 

—a 

INSTRUCTIONS: To execute the Command type it and then press Send button, 

| 0_ol[l]=u 

Oil*- • I ' ■:■■■./ 

-> l_mo 
<- 10_mo=l 
-> 10_mo=l 
<- 0_xp= 100000 
-> 0_xp= 100000 
<- Gaitl 
->Gaitl 
<- MotionStatus 
-> MotionStatus 
<- 0_ol[l]=0 
-> 0_ol[l]=0 

Start Dynamic bait 

Commands 

Init. Position Start/Stop 

■ 

If 

ON Connected 

Fig. 14. HRoSCoS Client views. 

The HMI supports multiple screens, which can contain combinations of synoptic diagrams 
and text. The whole humanoid robot is decomposed in "atomic" parameters (e.g. a battery 
current, its maximum value, it's on/ off status, etc.) to which a Tag-name is associated. The 
Tag-names are used to link graphical objects to devices. Standard windows editing facilities 
are provided: zooming, re-sizing, scrolling, etc. On-line configuration and customization of 
the HMI is possible for users with the appropriate privileges. Links are created between 
display pages to navigate from one view to another 

5. Communication Infrastructure and Methods 

When building automation applications, communication with the host is often a crucial part 
of the project. Nodes of the network always function as data servers because their primary 
role is to report information (status, acquired data, analyzed data, etc.) to the host at 
constant rates. 

As shown in Figure 9, Hardware Architecture consists of three basic levels of automation 
which uses its own communication systems. The upper (Control) level uses a TCP/IP based 
communication protocol. Ethernet communication is one of the most common methods for 
sending data between computers. The TCP/IP protocol provides the technology for data 
sharing, but only the specific application implements the logic that optimizes performance 
and makes sense of the data exchange process. When data transmission begins, the sender 
should packetize each piece of data with an ID code that the receiver can use to look up the 

460 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

decoding information. In this way, developed communication protocol hides the TCP 
implementation details and minimizes network traffic by sending data packages only when 
they are needed. When a data variable is transmitted by the sender, it is packetized with 
additional information so it can be received and decoded correctly on the receiving side. 
Before each data variable is transmitted, a packet is created that includes fields for Data Size, 
Data ID and the data itself. Figure 15 shows the packet format. 

Data Size 
(8 bits) 

Data ID 
(16 bits) 

Data 
(32 bytes) 

Fig. 15. The package format. 

The Data ID field is populated with the index of the data array element corresponding to the 
specified variable. Since the receiving side also has a copy of the data array, it can index it to 
get the properties (name and type) of the incoming data package. This very effective 
mechanism is implemented to provide data exchange between the Control Server and 
different Clients on the Control level of automation of the humanoid robot. 
Bottom-level (Sensory and Field) communications are realized using CAN and CanOpen 
protocols (Fig. 16). 

These communication protocols provide data transmission in broadcast type of 
communication. A sender of information transmits to all devices on the bus. All receiving 
devices read the message and then decide if it is relevant to them. This guarantees data 
integrity as all devices in the system use the same information. The sensory system of the 
humanoid robot makes data exchange under lower CAN protocol and the intelligent motion 
controllers uses upper-level CANOpen protocol. The same physical layer of these protocols 
allows them to reside in the same physical network. 

The communication implemented on the bottom level involves the integration of CANOpen 
(Drives and Motion Control Device Profile) and the introduction of new functionality which 
is not contained within the relevant device profiles for the sensory data processing. 

Software Application 

Supervisory 
Controller 

Analogical 
CAN device 

Sensor 

Feedback 

Intelligent 

Motion 
Controller 

-H Motor 

Fig. 16. CAN bus-based communication system. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

461 

6. Walking Pattern Generation 

Fig. 17. Concept of gait generation method. For reaching the " Global goal", a set of "Local 
motions" must be generated. Thus the local motion decide the better foot location for going 
ahead, go back, turn left, turn right, doing lateral step, climbing a stair or ramp. 

There are many propositions for generating the walking patterns of humanoid robots, some 
of them a mass distributed based model, (Hirukawa et. al. 2007) and other ones a mass 
concentrated based model, (Kajita et. al. 2004 and Gienger et. al. 2001). The first approach 
describes the motion accurately, but it has a high computation cost, which is not suitable for 
real-time applications. On the other hand, the second approach saves computation time and 
performs the walking motion suitably. In this section, two kinds of mass concentrated 
models will be explained and discussed, that is: the inverted pendulum model and the cart- 
table model. Both models have been tested on the Rh-1 humanoid robot platform in order to 
generate stable walking patterns. At first, the 2D inverted pendulum model will be detailed, 
for introducing pendulum laws; next the 3D version is developed; after that, the Cart-table 
model will be introduced and its advantages with respect to the inverted pendulum are 
explained; next, the walking pattern strategy is proposed with the "Local Axis Gait" (Fig. 
18) algorithm, (Arbulu et. al. 2007, 2008). Finally, in order to compute joint patterns the 
inverse kinematics model is proposed, by using the screw theory and Lie groups. 

6.1 2D Inverted pendulum model 

The gait pattern generation for a humanoid robot could be simplified as: studying the 
motion in the sagital plane and concentrating all the body mass in the COG. In this way, it is 
possible to use the 2D Inverted pendulum model to obtain stable and smooth walking 
motion. 

462 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

The 2D inverted pendulum model is composed of a mass and a telescopic leg without mass 
(Fig. 18). 

f.cose 

f.sin 9 

Fig. 18. The 2D Inverted Pendulum Model with motion in the x-z plane. 

So, the model is described in the next state variables: 

r : Radius of Position vector 
(massless and telescopic leg) 

6 : Pitch angle 

f -Reaction Force on pendulum 
r '.External Pitch torque 

From the free body diagram of the pendulum ball, the dynamics equations should be 
written as follows: 

F x =/sin# + -cos# (l) 

r 

F z =fcos0-Mg--sin0 (2) 

r 

It is known that p=(x, z), so the dynamics equations of the pendulum ball motion are: 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 463 

F x =Mx = fsin6 + -cos0 (3) 

r 

F z = Mz = f cosd - Mg --sind (4) 

r 

There are several solutions for the ball pendulum motion from this complex dynamic model. 
In order to simplify the dynamic problem, some constraints could be taken: 

1) Motion at constraint height: 

z = z c (5) 

z = (6) 

2) It is possible to consider natural pendulum ball motion, so the input torque turns to 
zero: 

T = (7) 

From these constraints the dynamic equations (3) and (4) reduce the dynamic motion to a 
linear one: 

F x =Mx = fsin0 ( 8 ) 

F,=0 = f cosO -Mg ( 9 ) 

By combining equations (8) and (9), the dynamic pendulum ball motion is obtained as: 

x = g— (10) 

Z c 

The natural motion of the pendulum ball depends on the potential gravity field (g), position 

(x, z) and distance from the pendulum base (z c ). Thus, no linear dynamic motion equations 

are conversed to linear ones; this way a single solution could be found and this kind of 

trajectory is applicable in real-time applications of walking locomotion. 

In order to design walking patterns and to determine the spatial geometry of trajectories, the 

concept of orbital energy is introduced. Orbital energy evaluates the pendulum ball energy 

at the level of the motion plane. It is composed of the potential and kinetic energy of the 

pendulum ball. In this way, it is possible to determine if the pendulum motion is in a state of 

equilibrium, going forward, or if it never passes the zero position. 

The mathematical expression of orbital energy could be developed by multiplying equation 

(10) by and integrating it. 

464 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

dt = const 

2 2z„ 

(11) 

(12) 
(13) 

Equation (13) shows that a kind of energy is conserved, which is called orbital energy. The 
first term represents the kinetic energy per unit mass of the body, while the second one is 
the virtual energy caused by a force field that generates a force (g/z c ).x on the unit mass 
located at x. Furthermore (Fig. 19), E>0 means that the pendulum mass swings forward; E=0 
represents: the equilibrium state, the pendulum mass swinging toward the equilibrium 
point or the pendulum mass swinging out from the equilibrium point; finally E<0 means 
that the body never passes point x=0. 

At this point, it is possible to generate two-dimensional stable natural walking patterns. This 
study is the basis for obtaining the solution of three-dimensional walking patterns, suitable 
for any humanoid robot. Human-like walking motion can be obtained because 
biomechanical studies demonstrate that COG human motion on the walking cycle could be 
approached by an inverted pendulum motion. The next section focuses on three- 
dimensional pendulum motion. 

Fig. 19. Pendulum ball rolling in potentials. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

465 

6.2 Motion Laws of 3D-LIPM. Inverted Pendulum Model 

In Figure 20, the three dimensional Inverted pendulum model is shown consisting of a point 
mass (p) and a mass less telescopic leg, where p=(x, y, z) is the position of the mass M, which 
is uniquely specified by variables q= {0r,0p,r), so: 

Fig. 20. Three dimensional Inverted Pendulum Model. 
Following the right hand rule: 

x = rsin(0 p ) 

y = -rsin(0 r ) 

z = r^l-sm(O r ) 2 -sm(0 p ) 2 

The motion equation of the inverted pendulum in Cartesian coordinates is: 

(14) 
(15) 
(16) 

r.cos(<9) 

-r.cos(# r ) 

r.cos(# r ).sin(<9 r ) 
^l-sin(^ 2 -sin(^) 2 

r.cos(^).sin(^) 
^l-sin(^ 2 -sin(^) 2 

sin(^) -sin(<9 r ) ^/l - sin(<9 r ) 2 -sin(^) 2 
So the dynamics along the x-axis is given by: 

+ mg 

r.cos(<9 r ).sin(<9 r ) ") 
^/l-sin(^) 2 -sin(^) 2 

r.cos(^).sin(^) 
^l-sin(^ 2 -sin(^) 2 

^l-sin(# r ) 2 -sin(^) 2 

(17) 

466 Climbing and Walking Robots 

m(zx - xz) - — r + mgx (*-o) 

cos(^) 

And the equation for the dynamics along the y-axis is given by: 

m(-zy + j/z) = -* — r r - mgy (^) 

cos(# r ) 

6.3 Natural three dimensional Linear Inverted Pendulum Mode (3D-LIPM) 

In order to reduce the motion possibilities of the pendulum, we introduce some constraints 
to limit this motion. One constraint limits the motion in a plane, so: 

z = k x x + k y y+z c (20) 

Where zc is the distance from the xy-plane to the pendulum mass. Replacing (20) and its 
second derivative into (18) and (19), we get: 

g k y ... 1 Jl-sinO^-sinO?,)- 

x = ^x + ^(xy-xy) + -* '—— p —r p (21) 

z c z c mz c cos(6> ) 

p> 

•• g *,,-- -, 1 Vl-sin(^ 2 -sin(^) 2 

j> = — y — Hxy - xy) t^t ^ ( 22 ) 

z c z c mz c cos(6> r ) 

The above equations allow pendulum motion in any plane and slope, if the motion is 
constrained to a flat plane (k x =0 and k y =0), so: 

.. g i Jl- S m(0 r ) 2 -sw(0 p ) 2 

y =—y jx\ * r ( 23 ) 

z c mz c cos(6>.) 

.. g i ^l-sin(^) 2 -sin(^) 2 

x = — x + J — t (24) 

z c mz c cos(# p ) 

Note that (23) and (24) are independent equations and no linear dynamics is simplified to a 
linear one. 

The natural 3D-LIPM takes into account the trajectories of the Inverted Pendulum Model 
without input torques. Hence, the equations (23) and (24) are simplified to: 

x = —x (25) 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

467 

g 

-y 

(26) 

Solving those equations (25) and (26), a three dimensional pendulum ball motion is obtained 
in the gravity field. Figure 21 shows an example of the pendulum motion for a different 
support foot, i.e. blue pendulum motion for the left support foot at its local frame and red 
pendulum motion for right support foot at its local frame. 

Fig. 21. Inverted Pendulum motion under natural 3D-LIPM. 

6.4 Geometry of trajectory 

The pendulum spatial motion in the gravity field should be studied and analyzed in order 
to predict the stability and suitable three-dimensional local motion. So, describing the local 
motion (Fig. 22) in any rotational axis, it is possible to study the gravitational effects on 
natural pendulum motion, which is like potential energy acting on a space shuttle. 
Orbital energy on each axis being: 

E=-x 2 

x 2 

2* c 

y 2 y 

2z^ 

(27) 
(28) 

468 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 22. 3D-LIPM projected onto the XY plane at the local axis. 
The orbital energy on X'Y' axis is obtained as follows: 

E r x = -(xcos& + ysin&) 2 — (xcos# + ysinO) 2 

2 2z c 

1 9 1 p- 9 
E r y = — (-ism<9 + jcos#) — (-x sin <9 + y cos 0) 

2 2z„ 

(29) 
(30) 

We can calculate the axis of symmetry by solving the variation of orbital energy with respect 
to the rotation angle, and in this way the maximum is found; the mathematical expression is 
developed as follows: 

dE' 

39 

*- = 4(sin 0) 2 - (cos ff) 2 ] + B sin 6 cos 9 = 

A = 

f \ 
g 

xy-xy 

\ Z cJ 

B = 

f \ 
g_ 

\ Z cJ 

(x 2 -y 2 )-(x 2 -y 2 ) 

(31) 
(32) 

(33) 

Finding the symmetry axis from equation (31), by trigonometric identities: 

A 

sin 0. cos 

B (sin6>) 2 -(cos<9) 2 

6> = -tan ' — 

2 {B j 

It is well known that the y-axis is the axis of symmetry for 0=0, so: 

(34) 
(35) 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

469 

A = 

f \ 
g 

\ Z cJ 

f \ 

g 

xy-xy = 

\ Z cJ 

xy = xy 

(36) 
(37) 

Eq. (37) could be used for computing the 3D-LIPM geometric shape with the orbital energy 
mathematical expressions from eq. (27) and (28): 

f \ 

x 2 y 2 =(2E x+ (g/z c )x 2 )(2E y +(g/z c )y 2 ) 

(38) 

By simplifying the last equation an interesting expression is found which describes the 
shape of the pendulum mass trajectory in the gravity field (eq. 39): 

g 

2zE 

-x 2 +- 

g 

2z c E y 

f=-\ 

(39) 

It is possible to deduce that E x >0, because the x-axis pendulum passes of the local frame 
and E y <0, due to the fact that the y-axis pendulum does not pass of the local frame (Fig. 
19). These facts show us that the pendulum mass trajectory shape is a hyperbolic curve 
described by eq. (39). Furthermore, the natural pendulum mass motion in three dimensions 
gives us information about the motion range for several initial conditions, which could be 
applied to the single support phase of the humanoid body motion. 

6.5 Temporal equations 

With initial conditions ( X f , X t ) and ( y i , y. ) at time U, the mass trajectory is calculated by 
solving differential equations (25) and (26): 

x(t) = x. cosh(^^) + T c x t sinh(^^) 

c c 

x(t) = ^sinh(^) + i, cosh(^) 

c c c 

y(t) = y cosh(^) + T e y, sinh(^) 

c c 

y(t) = ^sinh(^) + y cosh(^) 

(40) 
(41) 
(42) 
(43) 

470 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

6.6 Cart-table model 

In order to establish a relationship between the COG and ZMP motion, the cart-table model 
is proposed. This model, by controlling cart acceleration, gives us an interesting relationship 
between the ZMP and the COG. 

1 

i 1 m \~ ** 

,, 3 

ZMFx 

* 

X 

Fig. 23. Cart- table model. 

By evaluating the torque in the ZMP (Fig. 23): 

*mp = m g( X - ZMP x ) - m * Z c 

(44) 

As we know the torque in the ZMP is zero, thus from the eq. (44), ZMPx is being by: 

ZMP x =x ^Jc 

g 

(45) 

Note that eq. (45) is similar to the inverted pendulum (24), with the main difference being 
that ZMP X is constrained to 0, while if we knew it, it would be fixed to any point on the local 
axis. In the y direction, a similar equation could be obtained. In order to get the COG motion 
as an inverse problem from the ZMP one, the solution of eq. (45) should be treated as a 
servo control problem. 

6.7 Comparing pendulum and Cart-table models 

In the inverted pendulum model the input reference is the ZMP and the output is the COG 
pattern. Note that the ZMP is always at the base of the pendulum (i.e. Fig. 24b). In the cart- 
table model, ZMP motion is instead generated by the COG as reference (i.e. Fig. 24a). 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

471 

COG 

ref 

m 

^> 

ZMP 

o k» 

a) 

ZMP 

ref 

^> 

COG 

Fig. 24. Comparison between the: a) Cart-table, and b) Inverted pendulum. 

Other facts are that there is a discontinuity in the change from a single support phase to a 
double one, so at high walking velocity, jerk is an important fact; it could be improved by 
using high-order splines. Thus, the cart-table model optimizes jerk and continuity is 
maintained at all times, no matter the change of phase, and in this way a high walking speed 
is possible. 

6.8 Walking pattern strategy 

Figure 25 show us the steps of the walking strategy, in the single support phase the 
pendulum ball follows 3D-LIPM laws (A to B, C to D and E to F); in the double support 
phase, the pendulum ball moves at a constant speed (B to C and D to E). This motion drives 
the COG of the humanoid robot. We could assume that the COG is in the middle of the hip 
joint. Foot trajectories are computed by single splines taking into account some constraints 
such as step length, maximum height of the foot, lateral foot motion, foot orientation and 
speed in order to avoid falling down and to reduce the impact force on the landing foot (Fig. 
26). 

6.9 Local Axis Gait algorithm (LAG) 

In order to generalize the walking patterns of any direction and surface such as stairs or 
slopes; the " Local Axis Algorithm/' (LAG) is proposed, (Arbulu et al. 2007) so as to plan the 
stable local walking motion. The LAG is divided into several stages: computation of the 
footprints; the decision of the ZMP limits around the footprints; the dynamic humanoid 
COG motion generation based on the mass concentrated model; and finally joining the 

472 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

footprints of the swing foot by splines. In this way, it is possible to generate each step online, 
using the desired footprints as input. 

Single support' phase] 
"3D-UPM 

Fig. 25. Walking pattern strategy 

-riJrnrn 

Fig. 26. Some foot trajectory constraints: max step length and max swing foot height. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

473 

The footprints (Fig. 27) for doing an n-th step can be computed as follows: 

P"=P n +R(0" z ) T .L" (46) 

Where: 

P"=(P" X P"y prf, 

l"=(l" x -(-i)"l; l- z ) t 

,/ j ,/ i ,/ j : World and feet frames 

P",P"- l ,P n+l : feet position 

L x 9 L 9 L Z : swing foot displacements 

n x 9 6 n , &l : rotations about world frame 

The walking patterns developed are introduced into the inverse kinematics algorithm 
(Arbulu et al. 2005) to obtain the angular evolution of each joint; those are the reference 
patterns of the humanoid robot. 

Goal swing foot configuration 

Supp ort foot frame 

Fig. 27. Footprint location. 

474 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

6.10 Inverse Kinematics model 

In order to compute the robot's joint motion patterns some kinematics considerations must 
be made. Due to the fact that the kinematics control is based on screw theory and Lie logic 
techniques, it is also necessary to present a basic explanation. 

Lie logic background 

Lie groups are very important for mathematical analysis and geometry because they serve 
to describe the symmetry of analytical structures (Park et. al. 1985). A Lie group is an 
analytical manifold that is also a group. A Lie algebra is a vectorial space over a field that 
completely captures the structure of the corresponding Lie group. The homogeneous 
representation of a rigid motion belongs to the special Euclidean Lie group (SE(3)) 
(Abraham et. al. 1999). The Lie algebra of SE(3), denoted se(3), can be identified with the 
matrices called twists "£ A ", (eq. 47), where the skew symmetric matrix "©*", (eq. 48) is the 
Lie algebra so(3) of the orthogonal special Lie group (SO(3)), which represents all rotations 
in the three-dimensional space. A twist can be geometrically interpreted using screw theory 
(Paden 1986), as Charles's theorem proved that any rigid body motion could be produced 
by a translation along a line followed by a rotation around the same line;, this is a screw 
motion, and the infinitesimal version of a screw motion is a twist. 

se(3)/se(3) = {(u,m A ):ueft\m A eso(3)}eft 4 

m v 

- m 3 m 2 

ffi 3 — tJU ] 

-m 3 m { 

m x 

V 

l\fm = 

m 2 

AU = 

u 2 

_m 3 _ 

_^3_ 

>mxu = m / \u 

(47) 
(48) 

The main connection between SE(3) and se(3) is the exponential transformation (eq. 49). It is 
possible to generalize the forward kinematics map for an arbitrary "open-chain" 
manipulator with n DOF of magnitude g(0), through the product of those exponentials, 
expressed as POE (eq. 50), where g(0) is the reference position for the coordinate system. 

e^ d = 

1 

/ U0 

1 
e^ e =I + m sin + m^ (l-cos#) 

\SE(3},m*0 

:SE(3);m = 

(49) 

g (e)=U^do) 

(50) 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

475 

A very important payoff for the POE formalism is that it provides an elegant formulation of 
a set of canonical problems, the Paden and Kahan sub-problems, (Pardos et. al. 2005, Arbulu 
et. al. 2005) among others, which have a geometric solution for their inverse kinematics. It is 
possible to obtain a close-form solution for the inverse kinematics problem of complex 
mechanical systems by reducing them into the appropriate canonical sub-problems. 
The Paden and Kahan sub problems are introduced as following (Murray et al. 1994): 

Paden-Kahan 1: Rotation about a single axis 

Finding the rotation angle using " screw theory" and Lie groups, at first, the point rotation 
expression from "p" to "k" is expressed by (Fig. 28): 

e* e p = k 

The twist and projection vectors on the rotation plane are as follows: 

£ = 

V 

-mxr 

CO 

(51) 

(52) 

Fig. 28. Rotation on single axis "oe>" from point "p" to point "k". 

U'=U—G)G) U 

v = v-coco T v 

Finally, the rotation angle is calculated with the following expression: 

= atm\2[co T (u 'xu'\u' T .u'\ 
Paden-Kahan 2: Rotation about two subsequent axes 

The rotation expression is the following (Fig. 29): 

(53) 
(54) 

(55) 

476 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

e &* e &<>*p = e Z* c = k 

(56) 

Fig. 29. Rotation on two subsequent axes "oe>i" and "002" from "p" to "c" and from "c" to "k" 
The respective twists are described as follows: 

6 = 

-co { xr 

CO, 

-& = 

-co 2 xr 

CO, 

(57) 

Some values are computed in order to obtain the point "c" with the following expressions: 

ycol co 2 p T 2 u - co[ v 

a = ■ 

fi 

\cq( CO 2 ) -1 
_ [co^co 2 )co\u -colu 

Y 

\colco 2 ) -1 
\u\ -a 1 - J3 1 -2aj3a>(a> 2 

(58) 

(59) 

(60) 

Obtaining the point "c": 

c = r + aco x + f3a> 2 ± ^(^ x &> 2 ) 

(61) 

Once we get "c" for the second sub-problem, we can apply the first Paden-Kahan sub- 
problem to obtain the solutions for ft and ft. Note that there might be two solutions for "c", 
each of them giving a different solution for ft and ft. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

477 

Paden-Kahan 3: Rotation to a given distance 

Fig. 30. Rotation of point "p" to "k" which is a distance "5" from "q" 
The distance "5" is shown as follows: 

e* p-q 

= S 

(62) 

The associate twist and vectors projection in the perpendicular plane of rotation axis could 
be computed as: 

£ = 

-coxr 

CO 

u =u- coco u 

u = u- coco v 

Projecting "8" in "go" direction: 

If we let "6o" be the angle between the vectors "u" and // o ,/ , we have: 

6^ = atan2[co T (u r xu\u T .u\ 

Finally, we obtain the rotation angle by: 

(63) 

(64) 
(65) 

(66) 

(67) 

478 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

= 0. ±cos 

f\\ HI 2 II HI 2 ^ 

2||«1lb1l 

(68) 

The algorithm developed is called Sagital Kinematics Division (SKD). It divides the robot 
body into two independent manipulators, one for the left and one for the right part of body 
(Fig. 31), subject to the following constraints at any time: keeping the balance of the 
humanoid ZMP and imposing the same position and orientation for the common parts 
(pelvis, thoracic, cervical) of the four humanoid manipulators. 

Fig. 31. Rh-1 Sagital Kinematics Division (SKD). 
Solving the kinematics problem 

It is possible to generalize the leg forward kinematics map with 12 DOF (0i... On). The first 
six DOF correspond to the position (0 lr 6 2 , O3) and orientation (64, 65, 6 6 ) of the foot. Note 
that these DOF do not correspond to any real joint and for that reason we call them "non- 
physical" DOF. 

The other DOF are called "physical DOF" because they correspond to real motorized joints. 
These are: 67 for the hindfoot, 6 8 for the ankle, 69 for the knee, 6w for the hip on the x axis, 
On for the hip on the y axis and 0u for the hip on the z axis. Let S be a frame attached to the 
base system (support foot) and T be a frame attached to the humanoid hip. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

479 

The reference configuration of the manipulator is the one corresponding to 6i = 0, and g st (0) 
that represents the rigid body transformation between T and S when the manipulator is at 
its reference configuration. 

Then, the product of exponentials formula for the right and left legs forward kinematics is 
gst(0) and gs't'W), being £ A the 4x4 matrices called "twists". 

g, 

,(»)■ 

A °\ . Ji 

J*. 

■& 

,(o) 

(69) 

g s M 

%n 9r. 

-,^33 

■&.,(o) 

(70) 

The inverse kinematics problem i.e. for the right leg (see Fig. 31) consists of finding the joint 
angles, that is, the six physical DOF (67... On), given the non-physical DOF (61... 6e) from the 
humanoid footstep planning, the hip orientation and position g s t(0), which achieve the ZMP 
humanoid desired configuration. Using the PoE formula for the forward kinematics it is 
possible to develop a numerically stable geometric algorithm, to solve this problem, by 
using the Paden-Kahan (P-K) geometric sub-problems. It is straightforward to solve the 
inverse kinematics problem in an analytic, closed-form and geometrically meaningful way, 
with the following formulation. 

At first, twist and reference configurations are computed: 

gM= 

1 

T x 

-s x 

1 

T v 

s, 

1 

T, 

-s. 

(71) 

T 

"0" 

"0" 

"1" 

"0" 

0" 

^1 = 

;u 2 = 

1 

;^ 3 = 

;a> 4 = 

;a> 5 = 

1 

;^ 6 = 

1 

1 

"0" 

T 

T 

"1" 

"0" 

"0" 

co 7 = 

1 

\co % = 

;a> 9 = 

;^io = 

;o) n = 

1 

;o) u = 

1 

(72) 

(73) 

V 

; Z 2 = 

~v 2 ~ 

; £ = 

"^3" 

(74) 

480 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

60 = 

-co 4 xS 
co 4 

;& = 

-(» 5 xS 
<y 5 

;& = 

CD, 

-co 7 xk 

CD 1 

'A = 

-co g xk 
co H 

;& = 

-0) 9 xr 
co 9 

-co l0 xp 

CD l0 

;fii = 

~-G) u Xp~ 

co n 

;& = 

-co 12 x p 

(75) 

(76) 

(77) 

Next, it is possible to compute the inverse kinematics as follows: angle 69 is obtained using 
the third P-K sub problem. We pass all known terms to the left side of the equation (69), 
apply both sides to point p, subtract point k, and apply the norm. We operate in such a way 
because the resulting equation (78) is only affected by 69, and therefore we can rewrite the 
equation as (79), which is exactly the formulation of the Paden-Kahan canonical problem for 
a rotation to a given distance. Thus, we can geometrically obtain the two possible values for 
the variable 69. 

e* A * ...e^gjfajffp-k = $*< -M-p-k 

(78) 

,& #9 

p-k 

P-K-3 

-> o Q 

(79) 

Next, 67 and 6g are obtained using the second P-K sub problem. We pass all possible terms 
to the left side of the equation (51) and apply both sides to point p. In so doing, the resulting 
equation (80) is only affected by 67, 0s and 69, and therefore, we can rewrite the equation as 
(81), which is exactly the formulation of the Paden-Kahan canonical problem for two 
successive rotations. 

Therefore, we can geometrically obtain the two possible values, for the pair of variables 67 
and 68. 

■e-^gMg s M l P = e 4 

■■■e Sn0a p 

(80) 

q'=e^ 

77 e< 

P-K-2 

1 ,0 % 

(81) 

After that, 0w and 8u are obtained using the second P-K sub problem. We pass all known 
terms to the left side of the equation (69) and apply both sides to point m. As a result of 
these operations, the transformed equation (82) is only affected by 610 and 0u, and we can 
rewrite the equation as (83), which is again the formulation of the Paden-Kahan canonical 
problem for two successive rotations around crossing axes. Hence, we can geometrically 
solve the two possible values for the pair of variables 0w and 6u. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 481 

e -&<>9 . . . e -tM g ^ (0} g ^ (o) _1 m = e^e f "^ e 4l2 ' 8n m (82) 

q"=e^" e >° . e t" e "m p - K ~ 2 > w ,6 n (83) 

Finally, On is obtained using the first P-K sub-problem. We pass all known terms to the left 
side of the equation (69) and apply both sides to point S. As a result, the equation is 
transformed into (84), which is obviously only affected by On, and we can rewrite it as (85), 
which is the formulation of the Paden-Kahan canonical problem for a rotation around an 
axis. Thus, we can geometrically obtain the single possible value for variable 6u. 

e -tnX . . . e -fi*4 g ^ (0)^ ( )-l S = e ^n S (84) 

q »> =e &°*S P ~ K -' > n (85) 

The arm motion could be implemented as follows: i.e. the 625 to 629 solutions. The 
manipulator shoulder and wrist do not intervene in locomotion and therefore 625 and 629 are 
zero for the analyzed movement. The other arm DOF may or may not contribute to the 
locomotion, helping the balance control to keep the COG as close as possible to its initial 
geometric position; but to achieve this behavior, we must solve the arm inverse dynamics 
problem, which is beyond the scope of this paper. A very simple but effective practical arm 
kinematics solution takes advantage of the necessary body sagital coordination (see the SKD 
model in Figure 31), and the right arm DOF is made equal or proportional to its 
complementary left leg DOF. Therefore, the values for the variables 625 to 629 are defined as 
(86). 

9 25 = 0; 9 26 = 9 l5 \ 9 21 = 9 l4 ; 9 2S = 9 l6 ; 9 29 = ( 86 ) 

With these computations, the right manipulator inverse kinematics problem is solved in a 
geometric way, and what is more, we have not only one solution but the set of all possible 
solutions. For instance, the right leg has eight theoretical solutions, which are captured with 
the approach shown in this paper (87), if they exist. 

Solutions = 6 9 Doublex O^0 7 Doublex n lo Doublex 9 n Single = 8 (87) 

After repeating exactly the same technique for the left manipulator, the complete Rh-1 
humanoid inverse kinematics problem is, in fact, totally resolved. 

482 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

6.11 Simulation results 

Fig. 32. COG hyperbolic trajectories in local axes (green) 

For three steps, Figure 32 shows the spatial motion of the pendulum mass, and the local 
frame (green frames) of hyperbolic trajectories obtained in the single support phase; the 
trajectories shape looks like a hyperbolic curve as deduced above. It is a hyperbolic 
trajectory because the orbital energy in " y-direction" is negative (this is due to the fact that 
the pendulum frontal motion accelerates and decelerates without passing the equilibrium 
point, as shown in Figure 19), so the eq. 39 describes a hyperbole. The passive walkers have 
another walking principle, which is based on a limit cycle, when the gravity fields act on the 
device to achieve motion. In our case, we introduce the reference COG motion to make the 
robot walk, so we can pre-plane the stable walking pattern and introduce it to the humanoid 
robot. It is noted that the pendulum base is centered in the middle of the support foot and 
the natural ball pendulum motion follows a hyperbolic trajectory; the smooth pattern found 
drives the COG of the humanoid robot; natural and stable walking motion is obtained as 
will be demonstrated in several simulations and experimental results explained in the next 
paragraphs and sections. Figure 33 shows the temporal pendulum mass trajectories, in this 
walking pattern the single support phase takes 1.5 seconds and the double one 0.2 seconds. 
After computing the inverse kinematics at each local axis (Fig. 32), the joint patterns of the 
right humanoid leg and angular velocities obtained are shown in Figure 34. Those allow for 
checking the joint constraints in order to satisfy the actuator's performances. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

483 

10 11 IE 

i -sos:- 

Fig. 33. COG temporal position (blue) and velocity (red) patterns for doing three steps. In 
the double support phase (between vertical dashed lines) constant speed maintains the 
trajectory's continuity. 

Rh-1 simulator results are shown in Figure 35, from the VRML environment developed, 
which let us test the walking pattern previously so as to test it in the real humanoid robot. 
This environment lets us evaluate the angle motion range of each joint, avoid self-collision 
and obstacle collision, in order to obtain adequate walking patterns considering the robot's 
dimensions and mechanical limitations. It is verified by several simulation tests that smooth, 
fast and natural walking motion is obtained using the 3D-LIPM and foot motion patterns. 

484 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

qm 

qzn 

1ti 12 

■■ 

10 12 

■D 2 4- 6 8 

m 

Fig. 34. Simulation of joint angle evolution and joint velocity evolution of right leg for three 
steps walking in a straight line (note that 67, to 612 correspond to qi to q6) 

In order to obtain global humanoid motion for avoiding an external obstacle (Yoshida et al. 
2005), walking patterns in any direction could be developed using a rotation matrix around 
the z-axis of the local frame and the proper boundary conditions such as position and 
velocity at the local frame of the COG, and foot trajectories while changing the support foot 
in order to obtain smooth walking patterns. Figure 36 and Figure 37 shows us an example of 
planning walking motion with a change in direction. The walking pattern generated in each 
local frame maintains continuity with the previous and the next walking pattern. In 
addition, real-time walking pattern generation is possible, which changes direction, length 
and step width at any time using the information from sensors or by external command of 
the humanoid robot, according to the LAG algorithm. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

485 

Fig. 35. Rh-1 simulator testing walking patterns. 

In order to correct mechanical flexion and terrain irregularities, some joint patterns should 
be modified (i.e. ankle and hip joints), by offline and online control gait. The offline control 
reduces high joint acceleration at the beginning of the single support phase, because 
correction starts at this time. Online correction compensates for the actual environment 
changes and the mechanical imperfections. In this way, stable walking is obtained, by 
maintaining the body's orientation and ZMP in the right position. 

486 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 36. Generating walking patterns in any direction. 

Fig. 37. Snapshots of walking patterns in any direction. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

487 

7. Control Architecture 

7.1 Control overview 

Humans usually walk using a specific walking pattern in normal environments. In cases of 
unexpected disturbances, this pattern can be changed immediately to another one in order 
to adapt to terrain requirements. The humanoid robot operates in the same space as the 
human and needs the same mechanism to adapt its walking to changing conditions. 
Although planned motion patterns satisfy the stability constraints, some errors caused by 
the irregularity of the terrain or some external forces can cause the humanoid robot to fall 
down. Moreover, the flexion of the mechanical structure of the humanoid robot is the largest 
source of errors affecting its walking. To reduce the influence of these errors on walking 
stability, the control architecture (Fig. 38) for online motion patterns modification has been 
implemented. 

The control architecture consists of two basic parts: Joint Control and Stabilization Control. 
The Joint Control is the core of the control scheme. When the offline calculated motion 
pattern is received and the motion is started, the Adaptive Control Algorithm adjusts the 
motion controller of each articulation to the diverse postures of the humanoid robot. If the 
sensorial system of the humanoid robot detects an error in the body position, Stabilization 
Control corrects it and then tries to recover each joint's trajectory in order to execute the 
previously calculated motion pattern. 

Upper Level 
Commands 

: 

Planned : 

Motion Control 

HUMANOID 

9 Mo 

Pattern 
Generation 

Positions^ 

Stabilization 
Control 

Joint 

Control 

j 

L 

i 

t 

Actual Joint's 
Position 

F 

osition 

Fig. 38. Control architecture. 

When the robot is working in the operational interaction mode (walking, object 
manipulation, etc.), there are several computing and communication tasks that need to be 
performed in a cyclical mode and be fast enough to avoid any possible loss of control. The 
periodic (with period Ts ) chain (Fig. 39) begins with the sensing task, taking the time 
interval tatt for attitude estimation gyros and accelerometers readings and tzmp for ZMP 
force-torque sensor readings. 

488 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

M 

Ts 

k 

^ 

W 

> 

zmp 

*CAN tpControl * Stabilizer hnvKin^PC hup *CAN 

Fig. 39. Main computing and communication tasks for the Rh-1. 

These tasks are followed by the tasks performing CAN bus communications, Posture 
Control and then Stabilizer and Inverse Kinematics Calculator computing, internal PC bus 
communications, Supervisory controller, and CAN bus transmission of new reference for 
each joint of the humanoid robot. 

The period Ts should be small and compatible with the dynamics of the humanoid robot 
movement. On the one hand, Ts cannot be made arbitrarily small because the various 
computing and communication tasks with execution times tatt, tzmp, tcAN, tpc, tstabiUzer, etc., 
cannot themselves be made arbitrarily small. Also, a small value for Ts would generate 
too many messages in communication lines (PC bus, CAN bus) that would overload it. On 
the other hand, Ts cannot be made arbitrarily large because of the dynamics of the robot 
(Nyquist criterion). 

Thus, 

^ S ^ Ktt + hmp + tcAN + tpControl + * Stabilizer + 

^hnvKin + * PC + hup + *CAN 

(88) 

And 

Ts< 

1 

2-Fr 

(89) 

Where Ff is the highest movement frequency on any robot link. 

Assuming that the robot walks at about the same speed as a human walking normally, 

Fr = 2 Hz. 

Thus, 

Ts< 250 ms 

(90) 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

489 

This upper limit of the sample time is a strict real-time requirement considering the 

complexity of the computing and communication tasks to be performed within this time 

limit. 

The following sections present the detailed design of Joint and Stabilization Controls. 

7.2 Joint Control 

Different postures of the humanoid robot radically change the motors' dynamics and 

require adaptive algorithms to improve the control of each joint. The main goal is to achieve 

the adequate systems response for the desired humanoid robot movements. 

In the humanoid robot Rh-1, each motor is controlled by the motion controller. This motion 

controller includes the bottom part - three cascade control loops (Fig. 40): position loop 

(proportional), velocity loop (proportional - integral) and current loop (proportional - 

integral). 

>'v© 

V(t) 

=> 

DC Motor 
(Brushed) 

T(t)w(t) 0(£) 

T = 360/is 

Fig. 40. Block diagram of the implemented motion controller. 

This type of a control scheme has a reasonable advantage over a simple loop scheme. The 

internal, faster loop absorbs the major part of disturbances until these affect the more 

important external loop. 

Moreover, the adaptive control algorithm is considered in order to maintain the real 

trajectory of each joint as similar as possible to the ideal one (motion pattern), obtained by 

solving the kinematics problem. 

Equation (73) presents a classical dynamic model of a loaded DC motor which is usually 

used to move the joints of a humanoid robot, 

Q0) = 

Ks 

(D + s-J) 

■'.(')■ 

1 

(D + s-J) 

■T L (s) 

(91) 

where Cl(s) is the velocity of rotor of the DC motor, I a (s) - current, Ks - velocity 
constant, D - viscous friction or viscous damping inherent in the system, J - total moment 
of inertia of a joint, and T L (s) - load torque. Evidently, when a humanoid robot moves, it 

assumes different postures characterized by different configurations of joints. This leads to 
continuous changing in the model of a DC motor. Thus, the adaptive algorithm, tuning the 

490 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

controller of each joint when the model of a motor changes, is required. It carries out online 
parameter modification of the motion controller in compliance with the system's behaviors. 
The most suitable way to implement an adaptive control scheme is the gain-scheduling 
control. It does not need online identification. The offline software integrating identification 
and controller design algorithms estimate position and velocity controllers' gains for every 
possible configuration of the humanoid robot. The identification is made for real gaits 
(forward walking, backward walking and turning) in order to consider the influence of the 
posture of the robot on the system dynamics at every moment of the motion. In other words, 
every offline trajectory (gait) is divided into small parts. For each part, its own values of 
controller's gains are estimated and a multidimensional table of gains is created. Figure 41 
shows the block diagram of the designed gain-scheduling motion controller. 

— 

£i 

0J 

, 

I 

Sains Table 

Gain-planning 
algorithm 

Position 
Controller 

>V© 

6 i 3 

r9 

Velocity 
Controller 

Vtt 

w(t) 

m 

Ts = \%0/Jseg 

Ts = 36\}pseg 

Fig. 41. Block diagram of the gain-scheduling motion controller. 

The online part of the adaptive algorithm updates the controller's parameters following the 

offline calculated table. In general, it is necessary to choose adequate parameters according 

to the actual angular position of each joint and the posture of the whole robot. 

This control approach has some advantages in comparison with the online adaptive control 

algorithms. It does not require a lot of online computational resources which is a critical 

restriction for implementing the controller for each of the 21 joints of the humanoid robot 

Rh-1. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

491 

7.3 Stabilization Control Joint Control 

As was shown in the previous section, the humanoid robot's dynamics is governed by the 
ZMP equation 45. From these equations it can be concluded that there are two main 
variables to control: 

ZMP d -ZMP a 

(92) 

COG d -COG a 

(92) 

where ZMP error is denoted as e ZMP and COG position error is denoted as e C0G . ZMP , 

COG d are desired and ZMP a , COG a are actual ZMP and COG positions. Equations (74) 
and (75) state that two different controls should be implemented in order to stabilize 
humanoid robot walking. Figure 42 presents the main structure of the stabilization 
controller for the humanoid robot. 

Desired CoG 
Position 
Desired ZMP 

Actual Forces and 
Torques Distribution 

Fig. 42. Stabilizer structure. 

Previously computed desired COG and ZMP positions generate joint trajectories which are 
sent for the humanoid motion. During the execution of motion patterns, the real ZMP and 
COG position should be measured. The Stabilizer compares it with the ideal ones and 
generates a new corrected motion pattern for the next moment. This control scheme 
provides a simple and effective way of controlling humanoid walking stability. 

7.4 ZMP control 

The implementation of the ZMP control should provide an easy and robust method to move 
the actual ZMP to the point where the target ZMP is located. The easiest way here is to 
neglect the influence of the part of the humanoid robot above its ankle joint. It can be made 

492 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

by rotation of the upper part of the mechanism with respect to the ankle joint as shown in 
Figure 43. 

Although the proposed compensational mechanism allows the actual ZMP to be moved to 
the point where the target ZMP is located, some problems appear. When the upper body is 
rotated with respect to the ankle joint, body angle errors in frontal Aq Bf (t) and sagital 

Aq Bs (t) planes (Fig. 43) appear. 

<**w 

Fig. 43. ZMP error compensation. 

These errors in frontal and sagital planes cause the appearance of tilting torques and errors 
in the frontal Aq F At) and sagital Aq Fs (t) planes during the positioning of the hanging 

foot. It can overturn the robot or introduce very strong instability and vibrations when the 
foot is landing. Therefore, the mechanism for compensating for the body inclination errors 
in the frontal Aq Bf (t) and sagital Aq Bs (t) planes should complement the ZMP control. 

7.5 COG - Attitude control 

Using a 3D-LIPM (or other method) for trajectory generation we assume that the 
humanoid's upper body does not have any influence on the dynamics of a model. In the real 
walking case it leads to unbounded errors in the COG position. It differs radically from the 
ideal position computed for a motion pattern. The tilting moment M CoG compounded by 

M x and M components denotes the robot's upper body dynamics (Fig. 44) and should be 

compensated by a control algorithm. The Attitude control is a special sort of a COG control 
which tries to maintain the trunk of the robot strictly vertical in every stage of its motion 
thus eliminating the tilting moment and body inclination errors. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

493 

Fig. 44. COG error compensation - Attitude control. 

The attitude of the robot is normally determined by a combination of gyroscopes and 
accelerometers placed in the waist, where the approximate center of the mass or the upper 
part of its backbone is located. As soon as the sensorial information is obtained, the most 
effective way to control the humanoid robot's body inclination is to maintain its backbone 
strictly vertical at every stage of the trajectory. In this case, it is enough to control only the 
hip joints in the frontal and sagital planes 

7.6 Double Inverted Pendulum 

As was shown in the previous sections, to maintain the stability of a humanoid robot it is 
necessary to implement simultaneously both the ZMP and the Attitude controls acting on 
the ankle and hip joints. The humanoid robot in that case should be modeled as an inverted 
double pendulum shown in Figure 45(a). 

Fig. 45. a) Humanoid robot motion modelling, b) Double Inverted Pendulum. 

494 Climbing and Walking Robots 

A double pendulum consists of one pendulum attached to another. Consider a double bob 
pendulum with masses m l and m 2 (m l 4- m 2 = M - the total mass of the humanoid robot) 
attached by rigid mass less wires of lengths l { and l 2 . Furthermore, let the angles that the 
two wires make with the vertical be denoted 3 X (ankle rotation) and 3 2 (hip rotation), as 
illustrated in Figure 45(b). The position of the center of mass of the two rods may be written 
in terms of these angles. The potential energy of the system is given by: 

V = (m x + m 2 )gl x cos 3 { + m 2 gl 2 cos 3 2 (94) 

The kinetic energy of the system is given by: 

T = - m l l\ $1 + - m 2 [if 4 2 + 1\ 3 2 + 2/j l 2 3 X 3 2 cos( l 9 1 -3 2 )] (95) 

Writing the Lagrangian of a system using equations (94) and (95) for 3 X , 3 2 and 
simplifying we get: 

(m x + m 2 )l { 2 3 { + m 2 lj 2 3 2 cos(3 { -3 2 ) + 

+ m 2 l { l 2 3 2 sin( l 9 1 -3 2 )- l { g(mi + m 2 )sin l 9 1 = r 

,, : (96) 

m 2 l 2 3 2 + m 2 l^ 2 3 x cos(3 l -3 2 )- 

- m 2 lj 2 3? sin( l 9 1 - 3 2 ) - / 2 m 2 gsin l 9 2 = r 2 

The aim of the present research is to develop a simple control strategy allowing for the use 
of traditional controllers such as the linear quadratic regulator (LQR) or a simple PID 
controller to regulate the inverted pendulum about the upright equilibrium point. As the 
name may suggest, the LQR controller requires a linear system for which it will generate 
constant gains for full state feedback to make the equilibrium point globally asymptotically 
stable. However, the dynamics of double inverted pendulum systems are inherently 
nonlinear. 

The approach chosen was to linearize the equations of motion regarding the operating point 
and define a domain of attraction within which the constant gain controller results in local 
asymptotic stability. 

Take the approximation that perturbations in the problem are very small, and those terms of 
second order and higher are negligible. In this limit cos 3 t —\, sin 3. -3., cos(i9 1 —3 2 ) — \. 
Applying a small angle approximation we get the following linearization: 

(m x +m 2 )l l 2 3 l +m 2 l l l 2 3 2 -/ 1 g(m 1 +m 2 ) l 9 1 = r 1 (98) 

m 2 l 2 3 2 + m^j/^j -/ 2 m 2 gi9 2 = r 2 (99) 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

495 

The state representation of the dynamical system in standard form is: 

1 

g(m l +m 2 ) 

™ 2 g 

m \h 

g(m l +m 2 ) Q g(m l +m 2 ) 

llhl-y 

m x l 2 

0" 

x l 

1 

x 2 

x 3 

+ 

_x 4 _ 

J 

1 

~m~l[ 

1 

m,U 7 

1 

m x l x l 2 

{m x + m 2 ) 

u x 
_u 2 _ 

m l m 2 l 2 

(100) 

With the output equation: 

*1 

10 

x 2 

10 

x 3 

x^ 

(101) 

where state variables x u x 2/ x, and x 4 are defined as: x. = &, x 2 = & , x, = S 2 , 

X 4 — iS* 2 • 

LQR controller design considers an optimal control problem that for given system equations 
(100) and (101) determines the matrix K of the optimal control vector: 

u(0 = -Kx(0 

(102) 

The block diagram showing the optimal controller configuration for the double inverted 
pendulum system is presented in Figure 46. 

x= Ax+Bu 

K 

K 

C 

K 

y = Cx 

Ji 

yi 

Fig. 46. Double inverted pendulum control system. 

Note that the control system presented in Figure 46 is the regulator system. In this case the 
controller maintains desired angles S x and 3 2 of the double pendulum close to zero. 

496 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

7.7 Decoupled Control 

Although the stabilization method for the humanoid robot based on the double inverted 
pendulum dynamics presented in the previous section seems to be the most appropriate for 
controlling the mechanism, in practice, it has many drawbacks. The main reason is that the 
double inverted pendulum considers control torques of both (hip and ankle) joints of the 
humanoid robot involved in the stabilization control. This means it is necessary use the 
torque controlled actuators to implement this control algorithm. Most contemporary 
humanoid robots are driven by DC motors with position control where torque control 
cannot be implemented. A decoupled approach considers that ZMP and Attitude can be 
implemented as totally independent and the influence of one on another will be negligibly 
small. To prove the appropriateness of this, let us examine the functioning of the already 
developed double inverted pendulum system in diverse initial positions of the pendulum 
(Figure 47), which correspond to different perturbations acting on the humanoid robot: 

Fig. 47. a) Double Inverted Pendulum 3 2 variation b) Influence of the 3 2 on 3 X variation. 

From Figure 47(b) it can be observed that a large variation in 3 2 does not have much 
influence on S x . Its variations stay practically at the same level in every experiment. 
Therefore, we take into consideration that the control of 3 2 will have more priority (or 
gain) and thus, 3 2 variation will be practically zero. On the other hand, variation of 3 l 
sensed by 3 2 can be considered as an additional perturbation and will be compensated for 

by the controller. Moreover, it should be noted that the dynamics of the real robot will be 
attenuated by the reduction between its links. Thus, stabilizer control of the humanoid robot 
can be considered as a sum of two decoupled components related to Posture control ( 3 2 ) 
and ZMP control (3 l ). In practice, decoupled ZMP and Attitude controllers were designed 
as LQR controllers. 

After the foregoing detailed development of all the parts, we now turn to the detailed 
control architecture (Figure 48). 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

497 

Fig. 48. Stabilizer architecture. 

A sensorial system of the robot consisting of two six-axis force-torque should provide the 
controller with the real distribution of the forces and torques F x , F , F z , r x , r , r z at 
the contact point of the foot with the ground. The 3-axis Gyro and Accelerometer provides 
the measurements of angular position 3 m and angular velocity & m of the upper body 
(trunk) of the robot in the frontal and sagital planes (Roll and Pitch), (Loffler et. AL, 2003 
and Baerveldt et. al., 1997). After the actual ZMP position x ZMP , y ZMP is computed by the 
ZMP Computational module and the real attitude is estimated in the Attitude Estimation 
module ZMP Ax ZMP , Ax ZMP and Attitude A$, errors can be estimated. These errors are 

the input data for the Stabilizer. The Stabilizer is designed as a decoupled controller. It 
controls error in ZMP and Attitude positioning of the humanoid robot by the motion of the 
ankle and hip joints as was discussed above. Finally, the compensational motion of the ankle 
A$ Af/ A$ As and hip A 3 Hf , A$ Hs joints in the frontal and sagital planes should be 

superimposed with their reference trajectories 3 Af , 3 As , 3 Hf , 3 Hs which are responsible 

for the entire walking process. By doing this, new motion patterns for ankle and hip joints 
are generated. The implementation of the decoupled stabilizer provides fast and easy 
control of the walking stability of the humanoid. All changes are applied to the ankle and 
hip joints eliminating the need for inverse kinematics computation. 

8. Experimental Results 

Once the design, construction and assembly stages were carried out, the robot's 
experimental results followed. 

Experimental results applying the natural 3D-LIPM and Cart-table models with Body 
Posture Control algorithms on the Rh-1 humanoid robot platform are discussed in this 
section. At the beginning, snapshots of dynamic walking of the Rh-1 humanoid robot are 
shown in Figure 49. As shown in the VRML (Figure 35) environment, the same walking 
motion pattern is followed. 

498 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

Fig. 49. Snapshots of the actual Rh-1 humanoid robot walking with dynamic gait. 

The gait patterns proposed above allow for stable walking at 1 Km/h. Smooth and natural 
walking motions are obtained by introducing the adequate initial conditions on COG body 
motion and correct boundary conditions in foot planning. Some results are shown in Figure 
50, where the frontal ankle joint's evolution can be seen in the chart, i.e. qi is the frontal right 
ankle joint, the blue line is the pattern obtained from the inverse kinematics model using the 
COG and foot patterns as inputs, for doing three steps; the red line is the on-line 
compensated reference pattern which allows for frontal humanoid body reorientation. This 
compensation is necessary because the mechanical elasticity tilts the humanoid into an 
unstable zone. On the other hand, wi is the frontal joint angular velocity of the right ankle, 
the blue line is the velocity pattern obtained without compensation, the red one is the 
compensated velocity; adequate interpolators have been developed in order to maintain the 
humanoid body in the stable zone. Compensated curves are delayed with respect to 
reference ones, because there exists a compensation time which starts in the single support 
phase. The qu and Wu patterns correspond to the left ankle frontal joint. In the sagital 
motion, a similar compensation had been made. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

499 

■h\ I 

■ 

i 

J i 

1 4 H h 

,'v. 

M 

1 

1 1, 

J\k ' A i\ ■ 

^tI\ Jin 

'■* 

\\flX ■ 

\,l u ^ 

I 

i 

1 i i k a ft 1 

Fig. 50. The ankle joint's frontal motion (angular and velocity evolution), original evolution 
(blue line), compensated evolution (red line). 

This compensation maintains the COG following pendulum laws, and thus, natural and 
stable walking is obtained. Posture compensation allows for a stable gait because the natural 
3D-LIPM spatial trajectories are followed. Offline and online posture control compensates 
for several things: the gravitational effect on the humanoid structure in the sagital and 
frontal motion planes, which tilts the humanoid to an unstable position; terrain irregularities 
and errors in the concentrated mass model that we have used for generating walking 
patterns. The offline compensated and real measured joint pattern references for both legs 
are shown in Figure 51 and Figure 52; furthermore the joints' current consumptions are 
presented in Figure 53, in order to check the actuators current limits. Next, snapshots 
following the Cart-table model are shown in Figure 54. Successful results of straight walking 
motion in the laboratory and hall have been obtained. The step length is about 180mm, max 
feet height 40mm and step time about 1.25 sec. The joint patterns and angular velocities of 
the right leg results are shown in Figure 55 and Figure 56. The reference, offline corrected 
and real measure patterns of each joint for taking three steps forward are overlapped. The 
main differences are overlapped between the offline compensation and measured joint 
evolution is because of the variations, friction on the surface and mechanical imperfections 
of the robot. 

We test that the control system allows for a stable walking motion in a straight line. Further 
improvements on the mechanical structure, walking pattern generation and control (i.e. foot 
landing with compliance control, for reducing the impact forces) in order to compensate for 
whole body moments, will induce a smooth and natural walking motion. 

500 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

q 1 (cleg) 

q 2 ( de 9) 

---pXft - 

time (sec) 

q 4 (deg) 

^z._ 

iii 

time (sec) 
% (deg) 

q 8 meg i 

10 12 14 

time (sec) 
q 10 (cleg) 

i i A/A i i 

i I / I \ i i 

\-- 

■f-\ '^j\Yi^-- : h 

/ | j ; ; | \ 

Fig. 51. Both leg joint patterns. Reference (blue) and offline corrected (red) overlapped. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

501 

q., Meg) 

q 2 (deg) 

60 
40 

time (sec) 
q 3 (deg) 

10 

-10 
-20 
-30 
-40 

time (sec) 
% (deg) 

L aJ i i A i 

\-\-f^^r^-----\ -£/- [ - 

i /\j i i /j\\ i 

20 

.?n 

-f-^----\^--\ Wi-^Pv- 

10 12 14 

5 

-5 

time (sec) 
q 5 (deg) 

_zv 

....\X^i/.... 

10 12 14 

time (sec) 
q 6 (deg) 

0.5 

-0.5 

60 
40 

time (sec) 
q 10 (deg) 

V^-l "T^^ \ 

20 

^ fv 

10 12 14 

time (sec) 

10 12 14 

Fig. 52. Both leg joint patterns, a) Reference (blue) and offline corrected (red) overlapped; b) 
Offline corrected and measured (black) overlapped. 

502 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

I, (AMP) 

, (AMP) 

I l - I I ' : I 

-#) 

ill ■ ■ 

j 

ife#f| 

fy 

J H^w" 

6 8 10 

time (sec) 
l s (AMP) 

2 Y\ f 

\ i ■ ■ ■ 

i 

l^pffl 

J^j : 

10 12 14 

time (sec) 

Fig. 53. Both legs' current consumption. 

H^iwlw- 

10 12 14 

time (sec) 
l 12 (AMP) 

time (sec) 

10 12 14 

y:xpi^:i|fe: 

10 12 14 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 

503 

Fig. 54. Rh-1 snapshots walking forward. 

9. Conclusions 

Normal bipedal gait is achieved through a complex combination of automatic and volitional 
postural components. Normal walking requires stability to provide antigravity support of 
body weight, mobility of body segments and motor control to sequence multiple segments 
while transferring body weight from one limb to another. The result is energy-efficient 
forward progression. The human "gait cycle" has been analyzed in order to understand 
biped walking motion in its main phases, single support and double support phases and 
their properties: force reaction, cycle time, foot, knee, hip and body motion trajectories. In 
this way humanoid robot trajectories can be created on the order of human ones. It is 
demonstrated that the COG human motion follows the inverted pendulum laws at normal 
walking velocity, which is an important fact for maintaining stability while walking. 
Concerning the facts previously explained, it is possible to state that very satisfactory results 
were obtained, thus being a starting point for innumerable investigations in the future. 

504 

Climbing and Walking Robots 

q^ (cleg) 

w (RPM) 

^A. ■ $ """\ 

\-f 

4 6 

time (sec) 

q R (deg) 

4 6 

time (sec) 

10 

10 

Fig. 55. Real joint angular evolution 
(dot dashed black line), offline 
compensated (continuous red line) and 
reference (blue dashed line). Right leg. 

time (sec) 
w (RPM) 

5000 

-5000 

5000 

-5000 

5000 

-s. 

I 

,A 

i i 

i\ >"*"! 

xzzp*- 

i 

V 

V 

4 6 

time (sec) 

w (RPM) 

...& LSI 

*& 

4 6 

time (sec) 
w (RPM) 

4 6 

time (sec) 
w 5 (RPM) 

-2000 

w R (RPM) 

4 6 

time (sec) 

10 

f\ \ 

£ 

sstes&e: 

A ! A 

* i i| // r. 

^ 

/; 

10 

Fig. 56. Real (dot dashed black line) 
and reference (blue dashed line) motor 
angular velocity evolution. Right leg. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 505 

At the moment, many improvements and corrections are to be done to the mechanical parts. 
Due to the great amount of elements working together, some unwanted clearances and 
movements in the mechanical structure of the robot may appear. Furthermore, the robot is 
in its second evaluation stage and the number of elements that make up the robot must be 
decreased, either by redesigning the most critical ones or by fusing several of them into one. 
Compliance foot improvements will be implemented in order to reduce the efforts on each 
joint and overall structure. 

Considering the hardware and software architecture of the Rh-1 robot, we must point out 
that this work makes an effort to show that there is a possibility of bringing some basic 
aspects of industrial automation and control to the other, more sophisticated fields of 
robotics, in order to extend further standardization and unification of the design processes. 
Moreover, the proposed approach allows for consideration of humanoid robot locomotion 
inside the global automation problem. 

Dynamic walking was successfully implemented in the Rh-1 humanoid robot. It can walk 
smoothly and about twenty times faster than when using a static walking pattern, as was 
studied in previous works. 

The SKD humanoid model makes it easy to solve the inverse kinematics problem using Lie 
groups math techniques, such as the POE. For bipedal locomotion, 3D-LIPM and Cart- table 
models of the COG motion can be computed in real time and be dynamically stable. The 
algorithms introduced have closed-form solutions with clear geometric meaning, and 
therefore can be useful for developing robust real-time applications. 

It was demonstrated that offline compensation of the body orientation contributes to online 
control, reducing high joint accelerations. As a result, a stable motion was obtained. 

The Stabilizer was designed as a decoupled controller. It controls the error in ZMP and 
Attitude positioning of the humanoid robot by the motion of the ankle and hip joints. 

The humanoid robot Rh-1 provided with the developed control architecture is able to walk 
stably on a plain surface and to absorb some external disturbances. Future work will be 
focused on adding other elements to the proposed control architecture such as a foot 
landing control in order to correct for structural and walking surface imperfections, and to 
reduce the mechanical landing impact on the humanoid structure, which are the essential 
conditions for achieving stable humanoid robot walking on irregular terrain. Also further 
improvements on existing mechanical, hardware and software architecture will be 
continued. 

10. References 

K. Hirai, M. Hirose, Y. Hikawa and T. Takanaka, The development of Honda humanoid 
robot, IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation ICRA 1998) 
Leuven (Belgium) 

506 Climbing and Walking Robots 

K. Kaneko, F. Kanehiro, S. Kajita, K. Yokoyama, K. Akachi, T. Kawasaki, S. Ota and T. 

Isozumi, "Design of prototype humanoid robotics platform for HRP", Proc. of 

IEEE/RSJ Int. Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 2431-2436, 2002. 
J.M. Pardos; C.Balaguer, Rh-0 Humanoid Robot Bipedal Locomotion and Navigation Using 

Lie Groups and Geometric Algorithm. International Conference on Intelligent 

Robots and Systems (IROS'2005). Edmonton. Canada. Aug, 2005 
M. Arbulu, J.M. Pardos, L.M. Cabas, P. Staroverov, D. Kaynov, C Perez, M.A. Rodriguez; C. 

Balaguer, Rh-0 humanoid full size robot's control strategy based on the Lie logic 

technique, IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots 

(Humanoids'2005). Tsukuba. Japan. Dec, 2005 
S. Stramigioli, B. Mashke, C. Bidard, On the geometry of rigid body motions: the relation 

between Lie groups and screws, Journal of Mechanical Engineering Science, Vol. 

216, n. CI, pp 13-23, 2002. 
M. Arbulu, F. Prieto, L. Cabas, P. Staroverov, D. Kaynov, C. Balaguer, ZMP Human Measure 

System. 8th International Conference on Climbing and Walking Robots 

(Clawar'2005). London. United Kingdom. Sep, 2005 
J. Yamaguchi, E. Soga, S. Inoue A. and Takanishi, Development of a bipedal humanoid robot 

control method of whole body cooperative dynamic bipedal walking, IEEE 

International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA' 1999), Detroit, (USA) 
S. Kajita, F. Kaneiro, K. Kaneko, K. Fujiwara, K. Yokoi. and H. Hirukawa, Biped walking 

pattern generation by a simple 3D inverted pendulum model, Autonomous Robots, 

vol 17, n a 2, 2003 
M.H. Raibert, Legged robots that balance, MIT Press: Cambridge, 1986 
M. Arbulu; L.M. Cabas; P. Staroverov; D. Kaynov; C. Perez; C. Balaguer. On-line walking 

patterns generation for Rh-1 Humanoid Robot using a simple three-dimensional 

inverted pendulum model. 9th Internacional Conference on Climbing and Walking 

Robots (Clawar 2006). Brussels. Belgium. Sep, 2006. 
C.L. Shin, Y.Z. v Li, S.Churng, T.T. Lee and W.A. Cruver. Trajectory Synthesis and Physical 

Admissibility for a Biped Robot During the Single-Support Phase, Proc. of IEEE 

International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 1646-1652, 1990 
M. Vukobratovic, D. Juricic. Contribution to the Synthesis of Biped Gait. IEEE Tran. On Bio- 
Medical Engineering, Vol. 16, No. 1, pp. 1-6, 1969 
J. Furusho and A. Sano, Sensor-Based Control of a Nine-Link Biped, Int. J. on Robotics 

Research, Vol.. 9, No. 2, pp. 83-98, 1990 
Y. Fujimoto, S. Obata and A. Kawamura. Robust Biped Walking with Active Interaction 

Control between Foot and Ground, Proc. of IEEE International Conference on 

Robotics and Automation, pp. 2030-2035, 1998 
J. H. Park and H. C. Cho. An On-line Trajectory Modifier for the Base Link of Biped Robots 

to Enhance Locomotion Stability, Proc. of the IEEE ICRA2000, pp. 3353-3358, 2000. 
Q. Huang; K. Kaneko; K. Yokoi; S. Kajita; T. Kotoku; N. Koyachi; H. Arai; N. Imamura; K. 

Komoriya; K. Tanie. Balance Control of a Biped Robot Combining Off-line Pattern 

with Real-time Modification, Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Robotics 

and Automation, 2000. 
L. Cabas, S. de Torre, I. Prieto, M. Arbulu, C. Balaguer, Development of the lightweight 

human size humanoid robot RH-0. CLAWAR 2004, Madrid September 2004. 

The Rh-1 full-size humanoid robot: Control system design and Walking pattern generation 507 

L.M. Cabas; R. Cabas; P. Staroverov; M. Arbulu; D. Kaynov; C. Perez; C. Balaguer. 
Challenges in the design of the humanoid robot RH-1. 9th Internacional Conference 
on Climbing and Walking Robots (Clawar 2006). Brussels. Belgium. Sep, 2006. 

A. Bicchi, G. Tonietti, and R. Schiavi. Safe and Fast Actuators for Machines Interacting with 

Humans. In Proc. of the 1st Technical Exhibition Based Conference on Robotics and 

Automation, TExCRA2004, November 18-19, TEPIA, Tokyo, Japan, 2004. 
L.M. Cabas; R. Cabas; P. Staroverov; M. Arbulu; D. Kaynov; C. Perez; C. Balaguer. 

Mechanical Calculations on a Humanoid Robot. 9th Internacional Conference on 

Climbing and Walking Robots (Clawar 2006). Brussels. Belgium. Sep, 2006. 
K. Regenstein and Rudiger Dillmann, Design of an open hardware architecture for the 

humanoid robot ARMAR, Proc. of IEEE Int. Conference on Humanoid Robots, 

2003. 
D. Kaynov; M.A. Rodriguez; M. Arbulu; P. Staroverov; L.M. Cabas; C. Balaguer. Advanced 

motion control system for the humanoid robot Rh-0. 8th International Conference 

on Climbing and Walking Robots (Clawar 2005), 2005. 

D. Kaynov, C.Balaguer. Industrial automation based approach to design control system of 

the humanoid robot. Application to the Rh-1 humanoid robot. Accepted for IEEE 
International Symposium on Industrial Electronics (ISIE2007) 

E. Yoshida, I. Belousov, C. Esteves and J. P. Laumond. Humanoid Motion Planning for 

Dynamic Tasks, Proceedings of IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid 

Robots (Humanoids 2005), pp. 1-6, 2005. 
Loffler, M. Giender and F. Pfeifer. Sensors and Control Design of a Dynamically Stable 

Biped Robot, Proc. of IEEE Int. Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 484- 

490,2003 
M. Gienger, K. Loffler, and F. Pfeifer, "Towards the design of biped jogging robot", Proc. of 

IEEE Int. Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 4140-4145, 2001. 
A.-J. Baerveldt, R. Klang. A low cost and Low-weight Attitude Estimation System for an 

Autonomous Helicopter. Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Intelligent 

Engineering Systems, pp. 391-391, 1997. 
H. Hirukawa, S. Hattori, S. Kajita, K. Harada, K. Kaneko, F. Kanehiro, M. Morisawa, and S. 

Nakaoka, A pattern generator of humanoid robots walking on a rough terrain, in 

IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, Roma and Italy, April 

10-14 2007, pp. 2781- 2187. 
S. Kajita, F. Kanehiro, K. Kaneko, K. Fujiwara, K. Harada, K. Yokoi, and H. Hirukawa, Biped 

walking pattern generation by using preview control of zero-moment point, in 

IEEE International Conference on Robotics Automation, Taipei and Taiwan, 

September 14-19 2003, pp. 162-1626. 
M. Arbulu and C. Balaguer, Real-time gait planning for Rh-1 humanoid robot, using local 

axis gait algorithm, in 7th IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid 

Robots, Pittsburgh, USA, Nov. 29-Dec. 2 2007. 
F.C. Park, J.E. Bobrow, and S.R. Ploen, "A Lie group formulation of robot dynamics," Int. J. 

Robotics Research. Vol. 14, No. 6, pp. 609-618, 1995. 
R.A. Abraham, and J.E. Marsden, Foundations of Mechanics. Perseus Publishing, 1999. 

B. Paden. Kinematics and Control Robot Manipulators. PhD thesis, Department of Electrical 

Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, 1986. 

508 Climbing and Walking Robots 

S. Torre; L.M. Cabas; M. Arbulu; C. Balaguer. Inverse Dynamics of Humanoid Robot by 

Balanced Mass Distribution Method. IEEE/RSJ International Conference on 

Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS'2004). Sendai. Japan. Sep, 2004. 
M. Arbulu and C. Balaguer, Real-time gait planning for Rh-1 humanoid robot, using local 

axis gait algorithm, in International Journal of Humanoid Robotics. Print ISSN: 

0219-8436. Online ISSN: 1793-6942. Vol. 6. No. 1. pp.71-91. 2009 
R. M. Murray, Z. Li, and S. S. Sastry. Mathematical Introduction To Robotic Manipulation. 

CRC Press, 1994. 
E. Ayyappa. Normal human locomotion, part 1: Basic concepts and terminology. Journal of 

Prosthetics and Orthotics, pages 10-17, 1997. 
D. A. Winter. Biomechanics And Motor Control of Human Movement. A Wiley-Interscience 

Publication, 1990. 
K. Loeffler, M. Gienger, F. Pfeiffer, and H. Ulbrich. Sensors and control concept of a biped 

robot. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, 51:1-9, 2004. 
S. Lohmeier, T. Buschmann, H. Ulbrich, F. Pfeiffer: Modular joint design for performance 

enhanced humanoid robot LOLA. In: Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Rob. Aut. (ICRA), pp. 

88-93(2006) 
K. Kaneko, K. Harada, F. Kanehiro, G. Miyamori, K. Akachi, Humanoid Robot HRP-3, IEEE- 

RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids'2008). Nice. 

France. 
OLD AND NEW. 13 

and more ordinarily accepted meaning of the 
term, namely, such self-moving machines as are 
made either in the forms of men or of animals, 
or by which animal motions and functions are 
more or less imitated. 

As mechanics, next to mathematics and 
astronomy, is the most ancient of sciences, and 
as the scientific knowledge of the ancients was 
ever shrouded in mystery to conceal it from 
the eyes of the vulgar, and to confer upon the 
initiated power and profit by working on the 
credulity of the ignorant, it was but only to be 
expected that mechanical science should be 
earl^ applied in the ancient mysteries by which 
the philosophers and the priests of antiquity 
maintained so much of their supremacy. 

One of the very earliest allusions to myste- 
rious self-moving machines is to be found in the 
eighteenth book of the " Iliad," wherein we are 
told of Vulcan that 

'* Full twenty tripods for his haU he framM, 
That, placed on living wheels of mas^ gold 

y Google 

14 AUTOMATA 

(Wondrous to tell) instinct with si»rit roU*d 
From place to place, around the bless'd abodes, 
Self-mov*d, obedient to the beck of gods."* 

Several others of the ancient poets besides 
Homer have sung about the wonderful me- 
chanical devices of Vulcan, among which were 
golden statues, the semblances of living maids, 
which not only appeared to be endued with life, 
but which walked by his side and bore him up 
as he walked. Aristotle also refers to self- 
moving tripods, and Philostratus states that 
Appolonius of Tyana saw similar pieces of 
mechanism among the Brahmins of India; but 
this must have been nearly four hundred years 
after Aristotle wrote, and some nine hundred 
years after the time of Homer. 

Then again we hear of Daedalus making self- 
moving statues, small figures of the gods, of 
which Plato in his <'Menos'' says that unless 
they were fastened they would of themselves 

^ The ** Iliad" of Homer, translated by Alexander 
Pope, xviiL 440-444. 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 15 

run away, and he puts this into the mouth of 
Socrates, who uses it as a figure to illustrate the 
importance of not only acquiring but of holding 
fsLSt scientific truth that it may not fly away 
from us. Aristotle in referring to these statues 
afiirms that Daedalus accomplished his object 
by putting into them quicksilver, but the learned 
mechanician Bishop Wilkins points out diat 
" this would have been too grosse a way for so 
excellent ah artificer ; it is more likely that he 
did it with wheels and weights." ^ We are more- 
over told by Macrobius * that in the temple of 
Hieropolis at Antiura there were moving statues. 
A contemporary of Plato and, it is said, his 
master, was Archytas of Tarentum, the cele- 
brated Pythagorean philosopher, mathematician, 
cosmographer, and mechanidanj to whom is 
accredited the invention of the screw iand of the 

^' ** MathetnaHeall MagUky or the Wonders that may 
be performed by Mechanicall Geometry.*' London, 
printed by M. E, for Sa: Gellibrand at the Brasen 
Serpent in PauTs Church-yard, 1648 (page 173). 

^ *' Satumaliorum Convivioxnm," Lib. L cap. xxiii. 

y Google 

l6 AUTOMATA 

crane. Archytas is said to have caDstructed of 
wood a pigeon that could fly about, but ivfaidi 
could not rise again after it had settled; and 
Aulus Gellius (who lived in the reigns of 
Trajan, Hadrian^ Antoninus Pius, and Marcus 
Aurelius), tells us in his ''Nodes Atticse," that 
"many men of eminence among the Greeks, 
and Favonius, the philosopher, a most vigilant 
searcher into antiquity, have in a most positive 
manner assured us that die modd of a pigeon, 
formed in wood by Archytas, was so contrived 
as by a cmain mechanical art and power to fly ; 
so nicely was it balanced by weights and put in 
motion by hidden and inclosed air. In a matter 
so very improbable we may be allowed to add 
the words of Favonius himself: 'Archytas of 
Tarentum, being both a philosopher and skilled 
in mechanics, made a wooden pigeon which had 
it ever settled would not have risen again till 
now.^"* And I am bound to admit that in this 
point I agree with him. 
^ Aulus Gellius, "Noctes Atticse." Lib. X. cttp. xii. 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. X7 

From the above description it would appear 
that a still greater invention than a flying au- 
tomaton was made by Archytas, for in an 
apparatus ** so nicely balanced by "weights and put 
in motion by hidden and inclosed air^* we have 
a very fair forecast of the modem aerostat or 
balloon, filled with gas and balanced by ballast. 
There cannot be any doubt but that the ac- 
counts of these very early machines (if such 
ever existed at all), have been greatly exa^e- 
rated daring the process of being handed down 
through long ages of ignorance and credulity ; but 
we may now enter upon surer ground although 
still very ancient. In the reign of Ptolemy 
Euergetes II. (Ptolemy VII.), about 150 years 
Bx:., there lived at Alexandria that great genius of 
mechanical science, Hero; and his remarkable 
book '' Spiritalia," of which I am able to show you 
several copies to-night, is itself a great storehouse 
of ingenuity in the construction of automata of 
very various forms and principles. This re- 
markable man was, if not the inventor, the first 

B 

Digitized by 

Google 

iS AUTOMATA 

describer of the siphon in both its typical forms, 
the syringe, the well-known portable shower- 
bath, the clack valve, the fire engine^ even with 
that mechanical refinement, an air vessel for 
insuring a continuous stream, a self-trimming 
lamp, the steam blowpipe, the pneumatic foun- 
tain called after his name, a steam engine, and 
last if not least, the penny-in-the-slot automatic 
machine for obtaining a drink, or, may be, a 
charge of scent 

I propose now to show you on the screen 
some photographic reproductions of pages in his 
book, some taken from the Latin edition of 
Commandinus, published at Urbino in 1575^ 
and some from the Italian edition erf* Alessandro 
Georgi, printed at the same place in 1592, some 
from the fine edition of Aleotti, published in 
1589, and others from the Amsterdam version 
of 1680, all of which editions I am able to show 
you. I have, moreover, copied some from 
manuscripts in the British Museum, of the fif- 
tjeenth and sixteenth centuries, of which ^there 

y Google 

OLD AND NEW. 

19 

are four in the National Library, ue^ two in the 
Harley Collection and two among the Bumey 
manuscripts. 

The first illustration I shall show you from 
Hero's work is a bird which| by means of a 

Fig. I. 

stream of water, is caused to pipe or sing. This 
little automaton consists of a pedestal (a b c d) 
(Fig. i), which is in reality a water-tight tank 
fitted with a funnel (e), the stem of which reaches 
nearly to the bottom ; to the right of this there 
is a little bush on which sits a bird, and a tube 

Digitized by 

Google 

20 AUTOMATA 

(o h) leads up from the roof of the tank and 
terminates in a little whistle, the end of which 
dips into a cup (l) containing water. When 
water is poured into the funnel, the air in the 
tank is driven out through the tube and whistle 
(g h) and, bubbling through the water, sounds as 
if the bird were singing. Thus the well-known 
bubbling bird- whistle dates back to a century and 
a half before the Christian era or earlier. 

The next illustration (Fig. 2) shows a more 
elaborate arrangement, in which there are four 
small birds being watched by an owl ; the mo- 
ment the owl's back is turned the birds begin 
to sing, but cease as soon as he turns towards 
them. In this apparatus the birds are made 
to sing in precisely the same way as in the last 
illustration, namely, by the dis];^cement by 
water of the air in the tank, but as soon as the 
level of the water in the tank reaches the top 
of a concentric siphon (f g) the water is dis- 
charged into a bucket, the birds cease to sing, 
and the bucket, owing to its increased weight, 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 

21 

lifts the counterbalance weight (z), and in doing 
so turns the spindle (p m) which supports the 
owl (r s). When the bucket is full its contents 
are discharged by a small siphon within it and it 

is drawn up by the weight (z) the owl turns its 
back to the birds, and the cycle of operations 
is repeated. 

In the next figure a still more elaborate effect 
is produced. Here is a pedestal upon which are 

Digitized by 

Google 

22 

AUTOMATA 

four little bushes each having a bird sitting in its 
branches ; when water is allowed to flow into the 

AUTER.edimesdiftafl|ijs fo&iliOQM 
dofiiiix. 

plan 4iiplirt||- 
toau oautteHf . 

bcMfincadiofe. 
ctorcslo«qtdcfe. 
ftaustflosibM^i 

cotofenori tepo 
ohwryringnUfe 
aamcdens.Inii 
pcrtwMienvM 
dcfotvr aqovta 
svt.lcamicreple 
cotbpcnori vaft 
coottogit bttini- 
4om pet diibe- 
■i,(|aicfttaip 

fbiniBferiMDro 
ccdere,<|Ooiiiqiie 

oertt, qttippc eft 
vasprfaauMipa 
Mcur . At rero 
acr,4«mipfecil 

«uniiM per £ftiiUB Ibfttua poidr. 
Fig. 3. 

funnel the first bird begins to whistle, and after 
a few minutes leaves off, when the next bird 
begins, and when he has finished the third bird 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 

as 

sings, afier a little time the fourth takes up 
the songy and when he has finished the first 
begins agam, and so on as long as water is 
flowing into the fiinneL These effects are pro- 

Fig. 4. 

duced in the simplest possible manner, by a com* 
bination of as many superposed tanks as there 
are birds to sing, the one emptying into the other 
by siphons. The illustration explains itself. 

In the next device (Fig. 4) we have a bird 
whose singing is intermittent* In this case the 

Digitized by 

Google 

.^i^ 

24 AUTOMATA 

water flaws into a little cup which topples over 
the moment it is full, emptying itself into the 
funnel and immediately lightiii^ itself (being 
loaded at its bottom), the sound is produced 
by the displaced air escaping through a whistle 
in the manner already described. 

We now come to a different class, in which 
heat is employed for obtaining an increase of 
air pressure whereby certain automatic actions 
are produced. Here we have a priest and 
priestess officiating at an altar; and the effect of 
lighting the fire thereon is to cause the two 
figures to pour libations onto the sacrifice. In this 
case the altar consists of an air-tight metallic box 
in communication, by means of a central tube, 
with a larger box forming the pedestal. Into 
this lower reservoir is poured the wine or other 
liquid through the hole, marked m. . When the 
fire is lighted the air in the altar is expanded, 
and pressing on the sur£su:e of the liquid in the 
pedestal, forces some of it through die tubes 
which pass through the body and down the right 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 

25 

arm of each figure. In the next view (Fig. 6) 
we see how this princi{de was employed by 
Hero for the openii^ of the doors of a temple, 

Fig. 5. 

the tradition being that when a sacrifice was 
offered on her altar the goddess Isis showed her 
invisible presence by throwing open the doors 
of her sanctuary. In this case the altar consists 
of an air-tight metallic box communicating by 

Digitized by 

Google 

36 AUTOMATA 

means of a tube (f g) with a spherical vessel 
(h) partly filled with water. When the altar 
becomes hot the contained air is expanded, tiiere- 
by increasing the pressure on the surface of the 
water, some of which is therefore forced through 

the bent tube (l) into the bucket (m), which 
descends by its increased weight, thereby un- 
winding the cords from the two spindles that 
perform the function of hinges to the temple 
doors, at the same time winding up the counter- 
weight (r) on the left. When the fire goes out 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AKD NEW. a; 

the altar cools, assuming its ordinary atmo- 
spheric pressure, and the water in the bucket 
is forced back into the vessel (h), and the 
weight counterbalancing the empty bucket, 
closes again the doors. 

Like many other geniuses who have lived 
before their time. Hero had his plagiarists, his 
devices having been adopted and described by 
later writers without one word of acknowledg- 
ment as to their authorship.' From the middle to 
the end of the seventeenth century several books 
appeared which to a great extent were simply 
bad and erroneous copies of Hero's inventions, 
and not even intelligently copi<ed. Here for in- 
stance (Fig. 7) is a facsimiU of an illustration 
in a curious old book^ '^The Mysteries of 
Nature and Art," by John Bate, published in 
1635; this is poor Bate's attempt to steal 
Hero's device for the temple doors, showing an 
altogether impossible scheme. In the first place 
the doors could not open at all, for the ropes 
are so coiled as to neutralize each other's ac- 

Digitized by 

Google 

28 

AUTOMATA 

tion, and, secondly, the counterweight to the 
right has its cord simply looped round the 
spindle and therefore is absolutely useless ; the 
accompanying description is even more absurd, 

Fig. 7. 
for it explains the action of the apparatus as 
follows: "The fier on the Altar will cause the 
water to distill out of the Ball into the Bucket, 
which when (by reason of the water) it is be- 
come heavier than the waight, it wiU draw it up 
and so open the sayd gates or little doores." 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND, NEW. ^ 

Agaitii in one of Heroes illustrations a revolv- 
ing disc carrying little figures was made to rotate 
upon the reaction principle of his own ^Eolipile, 
or steam engine. By a little bit of bad perspective 
the ends of the cross tubes were shown as turn- 
ing alternately up and down, and Bate not only 
repeats this error, but goes out of his way to point 
out that <Mn the middest" there must be "a hollow 
pipe spreading itself into foure severall branches 
at the bottom : the ends of two of the branches must 
turn up and the ends of two must turn down^^ thus 
making any rotative action impossible. 

But Bate was not the only pirate of Hero's 
work ; a few years after Bate had written, that 
is, in 1659, there appeared another curious book 
by Isaak de Caus, upon Water Works,^ and in 

^ " AWv and Rare InvenHons of Water fVorket, shew- 
ing the easiest waies to raise water higher than the spring. 
By which invention the Perpetual Motion is proposed, 
many hard labours performed And Tariety of Motions 
and Sounds produced. First written in French by Isaak 
de Caus a late famous engineer; and now translated 
into English by John Leak. London, Printed by Joseph 
Moxon. Folio. 1659." 

Digitized by 

Google 

30 

AUTOMATA 

that book we find our old friend the owl keep- 
ing the 9niall birds in order, the only difference 

eft 4uteffi conftniAio talis • 

$itvasAB,tn 
flood loflttitcana 

'^nrfpirfnits^dki 
be^elbEF. al- 
ias aUerofn cros 
extra Talis fundfr 
ex^dac. tpfi vero 
fabijdatnr bafis 

pr«cltt(aCHKL. 
hfbensftipram- 
flncam (ipnonem 

MNX.&ofailo 
F fubrjciator O ? 
infudibolo, oiins 
caulis feratur in 
baHmG H K L, 
tantuf»diftansi 
ffadoa^iiaataio 

Fig. 8. 

ad 

being that this is a more indulgent owl, or per- 
haps he is a teacher of singing, for in this case 
the birds sing while he is looking at them and 
cease the moment he turns his back« 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 31 

Another pretty conceit of Hero's is shown in 
Fig. 8} in which there is a bird which not 
only makes a noise but at certain times will 
drink any liquid which is presented to it. The 
flow of water being intermittent, the cistern 
forming the pedestal is alternately filled and 
emptied While it is being filled the air escapes 
through a whistle and causes the bird to sing, 
and when it is bemg emptied, by means of a 
siphon, a partial vacuum is produced and liquid 
presented to it is drawn up through the beak. 

The next automaton from Hero is veiy in- 
genious and interesting, because it combines 
hydraulic, pneumatic, and mechanical actions. 
Here (Fig. 9) is a figure of Hercules armed with 
a bow and arrow ; there is also a dragon under an 
apple tree, firom which an apple has fallen to the 
ground. Upon the apple being lifted, Hercules 
discharges the arrow at the dragon, which begins 
to hiss and continues to do so for some minutes. 
In this apparatus there is a double tank having 
a connection by a valve (h), which is attached 

Digitized by 

Google 

32 AUTOMATA 

by a cord to the apple (k), another cord, pass- 
ing over a pulley, connects the apple with a 

trigger in the right hand of Hercules. Upon 
lifting the apple the trigger is released,, and at 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 

33 

the same time the valve is opened, allowing the 
water in the upper tank to flow into the lower, 
by which means air is forced through a tube (z) 
into the dragon's mouth, producing a hissing 

Fig. 10. 

sound, and this will continue until the upper 
tank is empty. Here (Fig. lo) is Bate's version 
of the same device, but very inferior to that from 
which it was taken. 

The next photograph is taken from another 
c 

Digitized by 

Google 

34 AUTOMATA 

work of Hero's, "Quatra theoremt aggiunii a ^i 
artifitiosi sfiriti^ a copy of which I have here 
(Fig. ii), and which was printed at Ferrara in 

1589. 

This figure illustrates a very elaborate auto- 
maton, representing one of Vulcan's workshoi>s 
in which you will see a smith forging a piece 
of iron, and assisted by three hammermen. The 
smith first puts his iron in the fire and then 
lays it on the anvil when the hammermen begin 
to hammer it ; then they leave off, and the smith 
turns round again to the fire. All these effepts 
are produced by the machinery below the floor, 
and shown in the illustration. A shaft (a b) 
is driven by means of a water-wheel on the 
right, and on this shaft are projections or 
cambs which, by striking the ends of three levers 
(t, X, and v), pull the chains by which the arms 
of the hammermen are lifted. While this is 
going on the bucket (marked 20) is slowly filling, 
and when a sufficient weight of water has ac- 
cumulated in it, it lifts the counterweight (17), 

Digitized by 

Google 

Fig. II. 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 35 

and, in doing so, rotates the vertical shaft to 
which the figure of the smith is attached, tunung 
him round to the fire, and at the same time, by 
swinging round the conduit pipe (h i), cuts off 
the water from the wheel, and the hammermen 
cease to work until the smith is again ready for 
them. I think you will agree with me that 
this machine offers very fair evidence of the 
mechanical ingenuity of a man who flourished 
more than 2,000 years ago. 

The last automaton of Hero to which I shall 
refer is perhaps the most ingenious of all, and 
it is one that those who were present when 
Brother Manning gave us his discourse oh 
Robert-Houdin have already seen, I mean the 
little figure whose head cannot be severed from 
his body no matter how many times a knife be 
passed through his neck. Thanks to the kind- 
ness of my good friend I can show you one of 
these beautiful figures presented to me by him, 
and it will, I think, be of interest to him and to 
you to know that this device was invented nearly 

yGoot^^le 

36 AUTOMATA 

3,000 years before Robert-Hoadin was bom, 
anda deacriptkm of it with accompanying figures 
may be seen to-day in the Biitish Museum in a 
Greek manuscript of the fifteoith century, which 
is a copy of Hero's irupirmXta, and I now 
throw on the screen a carefully made facsimile 
(Fig. 12) of the figure given in that manuscript 
(which is known as No. 5605 of Uie Harleian 
Collection). 

The head of this figure, which is otherwise 
s^pflimte from it, is attached to it by a peculiar 
shaped wheel piyotted between the shoulders of 
the body. This wheel may be described as a 
circular disc having an expanded rim so that a 
section taken through a radius would be of the 
form of the letter T» out of this wheel three 
nearly semicircular gaps are cut, each occupy- 
ing sixty d^ees of the circumference, and there- 
fore leaving three portions of the rim, each also 
of sixty degrees. The neck attached to the head 
is fitted with a hollow T shaped circular groove 
into which the T ended arms of the wheel 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLX) AND NEW. 37 

pass in succession as the. whed is rotated. As 
the grooire in the head occupies nearly sixty 

Fig. 12. 

degrees it follows that as- the wheel is rotated 
the rim of one arm can never leave the groove 
before the lim of the following arm has entered 

y Google 

38 AUTOMATA 

it, and so the head is attached to the body in 
every position of the wheel When the knife is 
passed between the head and the body it strikes 
against one of the spokes of the wheel, moving 
it forward and pushing one of the arms out of 
the groove in the head, while, at the same time, 
another, following behind the knife, takes its 
place, and thus the head can never be detached 
from the body. .Such an automaton is the little 
negro which I hold in my hand, for which I am 
indebted to the fraternal generosity of Brother 
Manning. Hero's description, however, carries 
the ingenuity of the device considerably farther, 
for in his automaton, not only is it impossible to 
.sever the head from the body by passing a knife 
through the neck, but the figure can actually 
drink both before and after the operation. The 
illustration on the screen (Fig. 13) is a sort of 
modem restoration of the Harley drawing, show- 
ing the disposition of the various parts of the 
mechanism, a represents the wheel by which 
the head is held on to the body, and it will be 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 39 

hoticed that a tube d d leads from the mouth to 
the neck and another, e, from the neck through 
the body; these two tubes, marked respectively 

T9 uo^m 

HEA^D 

Fig. 13. 
D D and s, are connected by the sliding tube p, 
which is attached to the two racks f and g, into 
which are geared the two toothed wheels b and 

Digitized by 

Google 

40 AUTOMATA 

c When the kntfe is passed from p to o it first 
rotates the holding-on wheel a, and then strikes 
against the radial foce of the wheel c, taming it 
through a small arc, thereby moving the racks, 
and, sliding the connecting tube f out of d, 
allowing the knife to pass, which next strikes 
the radial face of the wheel b, and, by turning it, 
restores the sliding connecting tube f into d, 
and thus recompletes the connection. The 
sucking-up the liquid being accomplished in a 
similar manner to that in the drinking bird 
already described.^ 

I have now done with Hero of Alexandria, 
but, before passing to another period, I cannot 
resist showing you an invention of his which 
although not an automaton is too interesting in 
the light of modem civilization to omit This 
(Fig. 14) is Hero's automatic penny-in-the-slot 
machine for giving a drink in exchange for a 
coin. If a '' coin of five drachmas " be dropped 
into the slot it falls on a little plate at the end 
^ Seepage 3a 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 

41 

of a lever thereby opening a valve and allowing 
the liquid to escape through the nozzle. 

It is more than probable that Hero was not 
himself Uie inventor of all the devices he de- 

Fig. 14. 
scribes, it is possible that many are due to 
Ctesibius whose pupil he was, and it is clear, 
from his own writings, that he was acquainted 
with the writings of Philo and 6f Archimedes. 
He was, however, the first to describe these in- 

y Google 

43 AUTOMATA 

ventionSy and therefore it is only fair, in the ab- 
sence of other evidence, to give him the credit. 
There can be no doubt that puppets or dolls are 
of great antiquity ; they were comm<Mi wi^ the 
ancient Egyptians, and here (Fig. 15) is an illus- 
iQk tration of a doll from Thebes which is 
yB^ now in the British Museum, and jou 
/1>^Lji^\ will notice that the head is covered 
with holes which served for the inser- 
tion of strings of beads to represent 
hair. Puppets were also in use with 
the Greeks, and afterwards found 
their way to Rome, and it is an in- 
teresting fact that, about three years 
ago, while the ground was being ex- 
F>«' IS- cavated for the foundations of the 
new Palais de Justice at Rome, at a spot not £ar 
from the Vatican, a stone coffin was discovered 
containing the skeleton ot a young girl of about 
fifteen years of age, who had teeth of great 
beauty, and in her arms was a beautifully 
modelled wooden doll with jointed limbs which 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AN6 new. 43 

was dressed in a rich material. The interment 
had taken place in the tune of Pliny, who refers 
to the child, and mentions that she was engaged 
to be married, a statement which is supported 
by the &ct that on one of the fingers is a doubly* 
linked gold ring, besides other ornaments. The 
cofl&n, with its contents as they were found, is 
now in the museum in the Capitol and it is, I 
believe, the only instance of an ancient doll 
having been found in Rome, although moving 
puppets or marionettes were known in very 
ancient times, and are referred to by Xenophon, 
Aristotle^ Horace, Antoninus, Galen, and Aulus 
Gellius. 

The next figure is an illustration of what I 
suppose must be the veiy earliest moving doll 
in existence to-day ; it is now in the Museum 
van Oudheden at Leyden, and is a toy which 
belonged to a child of ancient E^pt; I have 
constructed a model of it by which you will 
see that it is worked by pulling a thread; and 
here I must make a passing rrference to the 

Digitized by 

Google 

44 AUTOMATA 

notorious phallic figures which were csiried in 
procession during the festivals of Osiris and 
in the Dionysia of Bacchus. We are told by 
Ludan ^ that '* AWng the several sorts of 
Phalloi which the Greeks set up in honour of 
Bacchus there were figures of dwarfs with 

Fig. 16. 
moving parts actuated by strings, which were 
called * Nevpoffvaora.' " In so eminently proper 
a community as we are in Ye Sette of Odd 
VolumeSi I am unable to describe these figures 
in detail, or to exhibit them in action, but 
those who are curious as well as odd will find 
1 " De Syria Dct." 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 45 

abundant evidence of them in the writings of 
Herodotus, of Ludan, of Pausanias, of Athe^ 
nseus, of Plutarch, of Gyraldus, and of several 
other writers. 

The earliest forms of moving puppets were set 
in motion by strings pulled by hand which were 
afterwards supplanted by cylinders turned by a 
winch, and the transition from that arrangement 
to the use of weights and springs was inevitable 
and was only a question of time. 

From the time of Hero I have found nothing 
worth recording for nearly a thousand years, 
until the time of Charlemagne, to which mon- 
arch was presented by the Kalif Haroun al 
Raschid a most elaborate water clock. In front 
of the dial, and corresponding to the hours, 
were twelve little doors, and the tune was 
shown by these doors opening one after an- 
other, each releasing a little brass ball which 
fell upon a small bell ; after all the hours had 
^ruck, that is, at noon, another door opened, 
twelve little knights rode out, and, after career- 

Digitized by 

Google 

46 AUTOMATA 

ing round the dial, they closed the doors and 
retired The eminent mechanician Gerbert who 
occupied the papal chair in a.d. iooo, reign- 
ing under the name of Silvester 11^ is said to 
have constructed a speaking head of brass, and 
was in consequence arrested for practising 
magic, and Albertus Ms^us, who flourished in 
the thirteenth century, spent, according to his 
own account, thirty years in the construction 
of an automaton of clay which not only spoke 
but walked and answered questions and solved 
problems submitted to it. It is recorded that 
his pupil, the celebrated St. Thomas Aquinas 
was so horrified when he saw and heard this 
figure that (believing it to be the work of his 
Satanic Majesty), he broke it into pieces, when 
Albertus cried aloud : *^ Sic periit opus triginta 
annorum." I deeply regret this mischievous act 
of St Thomas Aquinas, because it renders it 
impossible for me to show it to the Brethren 
and our guests this evening. Roger Bacon also 
is said to have made a similar automaton* 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 47 

Records of speaking androides or talking 
heads reach us from very early times. At 
Lesbos there was a head of Orpheus which de- 
livered oracles and predicted to Cyrus his violent 
death, and we have it on the authority of Philo- 
stratus that the head was so celebrated for its 
oracular utterances, among both the Greeks and 
the Persians that even Apollo became jealous 
of its fame. 

Then again the mighty Odin had among his 
mystical possessions a speaking head, believed 
to be that of Minos, which Odin preserved by 
encasing it in solid gold. He is said to ha^e 
consulted it on all occasions, and its utterances 
were regarded as oracles. 

Mention might here be made of the colossal 
figure of Amunoph HI. on the plain of Thebes, 
and which is commonly known as the **YOcaX 
Memnon," of which a photograph is now before 
you ; it is the more eastern of the two Colossi, 
and, when the first rays of the morning sun fell 
on it, it emitted a sound which has been de- 

Digitized by 

Google 

48 AUTOMATA 

scribed as similar to that of the snappii^ of a 
harp string, but it has been silent since the time 
of Severus. It is a seated figure nearly sixty 
feet in height, and is in no sense an automa- 
ton, but I mention it here because it was be- 
lieved to utter sentences which the ancient 
priests of Eg3rpt alone, for the very best of reasons, 
knew how to interpret. 

In more modehi times we hear of the eminent 
Dr. Wilkins, Bishop of Chester (who married 
the sister of Oliver Cromwell, and who may be 
regarded as Ae founder of the Royal Society), 
experimenting upon the transmission of sound; 
and Evelyn, in his *^ Diary," writing on the 13th 
of July, 1654, says, " We all dined at that most 
obliging and universally curious Dr. Wilkins's, at 
Wadham College. He had contrived a hollow 
statue, which gave a voice and uttered words"; 
and in his " Mathematicall Magick," (a copy of 
which I have here) which was published in 1648, 
Wilkins refers to the speaking figures of the 
ancients. 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 49 

A contemporary of Wilkins was the celebrated 
Edward Somerset, Marquis of Worcester, who in 
his " Centmy of Inventions " gives as his 88th 
device: *' How to make a Brazen or Stone-head 
i& the midst of a great Field or Garden, so arti- 
ficial and natural that though a man speak never 
so softly, and even whispers into the eare thereof, 
it will presently open its mouth, and resolve the 
Question in French, Latine, Welsh, Irish or 
English, in good terms uttering it out of his 
mouth, and then shut it untill the next Question 
be asked." — But, imhappily, he does not tell us 
how it may be done. 

The great period for the construction of auto- 
mata began at the close of the fourteenth cen- 
tury, and reached its climax at the end of the 
seventeenth and beginning of the eighteenth 
century. One of the earliest mechanicians who 
devoted his skill to automata was Johann Miiller, 
of Konigsberg, commonly known as Regiomon- 
tanus. This eminent mathematician and astro- 
nomer made of iron a fly which is said to 

D 

Digitized by 

Google 

50 AUTOMATA 

have left his hand and, after flying to each of 
the guests in the room^ returned to its mastetc^ 
alighting on his hand. Miiller made also a still 
more wonderful machine ; this was an artificial 
eagle which, on the authority of Peter Ramu3» 
flew to meet the Emperor Maximilian on hid 
entry into Nuremberg on the 7th of June, 1470* 
After soaring aloft in the air, .Ramus informs 
us, the eagle met the emperor at some distance 
from the city, then returned and perched upon 
the city gate where it awaited the emperor's 
approach. On his arrival the bird stretched out 
its wings and saluted him by bowing. 

It is a remarkable fact that not one of Miiller's 
contemporaries, who often refer to this learned 
man and to bis great accomplisiunents, makes 
any reference to these pieces of mechanism, and 
Peter Ramus was not bom until forty-five years 
after, but they are referred to by Baptista Porta, 
Gassendi, Lana, and Bishop Wilkins, who, how- 
ever, differ considerably in their dates. Strada, 
in his "De Bello Belgico,'' tells us that the 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 51 

Emperor Charles V., after his abdication in 1556, 
took a most keen interest in automata of various 
kinds, and he employed a very skilful artist, 
Janellus Turrianus, of Cremona, to construct 
them for him» This mechanic made figures 
of horsemen, which marched along the table, 
played upon flutes and drums, and entered 
into combat with one another, and he exhibited 
wooden birds which flew up to theur nests (they 
must, I think, Iwve been wood pigeons). ' This 
Janellus Turrianus. was evidently a very won> 
derful man, for he made a comrmill so small 
that it cooid be concealed in a glove, and yet 
could grind in a ds^ as much com as would 
supply eight men with food. I never saw this 
machine myself, and I cannot help thinking 
that either the glove must have been rather 
large or the appetites of the men must have 
been rather smalls Apart, however, fix)m the 
ezaggoation of the 'genius of this man, he 
was undoubtedly a most skilful mechanidai^ 
for he repaired and considerably improved a 

Digitized by 

Google 

52 AUTOMATA 

most complex clock constructed by Wflhelm 
Zelandin for the city of Padua, in which mov* 
ing figures and astronomical phenomena were 
represented. 

The addition to clocks of automata set in 
motion by the train was a very favourite oc- 
cupation of the horologists of the sixteenth 
century. Of these clocks perhaps the most 
celebrated was that at Stnisbuig, which was 
constructed by Conrad Dasypodius. This clock 
was finished in the year-1573. Apart from its 
interesting representations of various celestial 
phenomena, it is remarkable for the number 
of moving figures which embellish it, and which 
perform various functions; above the dial the 
four ages of man are represented by symbolical 
figures ; one passes every quarter of an hour, 
marking the quarter by striking on a bell; the 
first quarter is struck by a child with an apple, 
the second by a youth with an arrow, the thkd 
by a man with his staff, and the fourth by an 
old mkn with his crutch. After these follows 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 

OLD AND NEW. 53 

the figure of Death, who, after sounding the 
hour on a large bell, is expdled by a figure 
representing Christ, while two small angels are 
set into motion, the one striking a bell with a 
sceptre, while the other turns over an hour-glass 
at the expiration of an hour. There are, be- 
sides, various animals, and among them a cock, 
which flaps its wings and crows just before the 
dock strikes the hour. 

The great clock at Lyons, the work of Lip- 
pius of Basle, is hardly less interesting. Besides 
exhibiting mechanical illustrations of astronomi-. 
cal phenomena, a complete cyde of operations 
representmg scriptural events is performed. 
Before each hour strikes a cock comes forward 
and crows three times, after which angels 
appear, who by striking upon a gamut of bells 
ring out the air of a hymn, and this is followed 
by a moving group illustrating the Annunciation 
of the Virgin and the descent of a dove, and the 
cyde is completed by the striking of the hour. 

In the Royal Palace of Versailles there was a 

Digitized by 

Google 

54 AUTOMATA 

very curioos dock, the work of Martinot, a 
dockmaker of the seventeenth centuiy. Be* 
fore it struck the hour two codes -flapped their 
wings and crowed alternately, ,llita two little 
doors opened and a figure canie out of each 
carryiQg a gong which was strudc by armed 
guards with thdr dubs. These, figures having 
retired, a door in the centre opened and an 
equestrian figure of Louis XIV* came out. At 
the same tune a group of douds separated 
giving passage to the figure df Fame which 
Jiovered oyer the. head of the king. An air was 
then chimed upon ih6 bells, after which the 
figures retired; the two gtiaids raised their 
dubs and the hour was stnidc. 

In the yeiir 1788, Agostino Ramelli published 
his . important, worit "Z^ Jmm^ ed arHfidasit 
Maekhu^^ and I have reproduced^ some of the 
plates in that beautifiil book, acopy of which is 
befoie me (one of. which, Fig. 17, see Frantis- 
piecCf I have chosen to adorn the menu which is 
on the table, for no other reason than that it 

Digitized by 

Google 

Digitized by 

Google 

Fig. i8. 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 

OLD AND NEW. 55 

appeated espeeM^ ai^propriftte as figurative of 
the desire of your humble Mechanick to be for 
ever associated with Yie Sette of Odd Volumes). 

In the nesct illustration (Fig. i8) we have a 
beautiful plate from Ramelli, in which another 
of Hero's inven^it^iSi. the group of singing birds 
is introduced as an ornament in an elaborately 
furnished room of the period. In this case the 
water is in the first instance lifted by air being 
blown in through a pipe by a person concealed 
behind the wall which in the drawing is broken 
away to show a mediasval old buffer engaged in 
this manly performance. 

About the middle of the seventeenth century 
magnetism began to be employed for producing 
Uie eflSscts of magic^ and that extraordinary ver- 
satile all^-round Odd Volume, Athanasius Kir- 
eher, in his ^^'Magnes sive de Arte Magnetica," 
which was published in 1641 (a copy of which 
t have here), describes and illustrates several 
automata which depend for their action upon 
magnetism. Here, for example (Fig. 19), he 

Digitized by 

Google 

56 AUTOMATA 

gives a representation of the Dove of Archytas, 
which by the action of a revolving loadstone, is 
made to fly around a dial and nuurk the hours 
by pointing to the figiu-es on its edge. 
Time will not permit me to say as much 

■2 

Fig. 20. 

about this curious old book as its quaintness 
and terribly bad science deserve, I will only 
show you one more illustration from it in which 
a wheel is driven round by two ^olipiles in the 
form of human heads, which blow out jets of 
steam against the cellular peripheiy of the wheel, 
and in the lower figure the little boilers (c and 

Digitized by 

Google 

Fig. 19. 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 57 

d) which the heads inclose, are shown separately, 
the noEzle of one pointing upwards, while that 
of thu other has a downward direction. 

When Kircher^s book was published Louis 
XIV. was a child, and it is stated by several 
auttiorities that both P^ Truchet and Camus 
nUMle the most elaborate automata for his boyish 
ailHisement, but as Louis XIV. was forty years 
<^ when Truchet came of age and fifty-five 
irtien Camus was tw«ity-one it is difficult to 
reconcile these statements with facts. 

Putting aside, however, the question of the 
period of life when the king amused himself 
with such things, it is well authenticated that 
Pfere Truchet, towards the end of the seven- 
teenth century, constructed for him moving 
pictures which exhibited extraordinary mechanic' 
cal skill. One of these was the representation 
of a five-act opera, the scenery of which was 
automatically changed between the acts. The 
actors came on and went bff, and performed 
their parts in pantomime. The proscenium 

Digitized by 

Google 

58 AUTOMATA 

was aboat sixteen inches in breadth and thirteen 
in height, and the whole of the machinerj with 
the scenery occupied a space oxdy an inch and 
a qoarter in depth.^ 

The account given, by Camus of a toy he 
constructed ftir this, baby kii^ .of 6!ky summers 
is very wonderfiiL This elaborate automaton 
consBted of a small coach dratwn by two houses 
and which contained^ the. figure ^of a lady with a 
footman and ia. page, behind. When this little 
coach was phoed on^the edgeof ajniitable table 
the coachman smacked his. whip and the horses 
immediatdy started, moving, their legs in a most 
natural manner ; when they, reached the oppo- 
site edge of the. table they .turned sharply at 
tight angles and proceeded along^tfaat edge. As 
soon as the carriage amved .o(^x>site the long 
it stopped and both the footman and page got 
down and opened the door,, the lady- al^hted, 
and, curtseying to the kin^ presented a peti- 
tion. After waitmg a few. minutes she bowed 
^ Mem. Acad. Sc Paris, 1739.. 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 59 

again to the king and re-entered the carriage, 
tiie page got up again behind, the coachman 
whipped up his horses and drove on, and the 
footman running after the carriage jumped up 
mto his former |dace. In the account given by 
M. de Camus he does not attempt to describe 
the mechanism of the machine and we have his 
word alone ibt the account of its performance. 
• The great philosopher Descartes formed the 
theory that all animals are merdy automata of 
a h^ degree of perfection, and, to prove his 
notion, he is said to have constructed. an au« 
tomaton in the form of a young giri to which he 
gave the name of " Ma fiUe Franctne." This 
^^e came unhappily to a watery gmve, for 
dnring a voyage by sea the captain of the vessel 
in which it was tmveHing had the curiosity to 
qpeh the case in which Francine was packed 
and, in his astonishment at the movements of 
the automaton, which were so wonderfully 
natural, he threw the whole thing overboard, 
believing it to be the work of the devil. 

Digitized by 

Google 

6o AUTOMATA 

I now come to what are, if not the most 
extraordinary pieces of mechanism^ certainly 
the most wonderful automata the world has ever 
seen. In the year 1738 that great mechanical 
genius M. Vaucanson, a member of the 
Acad^mie des Sciences exhibited at Paris three 
very remarkable automata which were, a flute- 
player, a figure which played the shepherd's pipe 
of Provence and the drum, and an artificial 
duck. The first of these, the flute-player, he 
described in a Memoir read before the Acad6mie 
cm the 30th of April, 1 738. This automaton was a 
wooden figure six feet six inches in height, repre- 
senting a well-known antique statue of a Faun, 
sitting on a rock and mounted on a square 
pedestal four feet six from the ground. It was 
capable <A performing twelve pieces of music 
on a German flute, the instrument being. really 
played as a man would play it by blowing across 
the embouchure and projecting the air . with 
variable force by movable lips, which imitated in 
their action those of a living player, employing a 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 6i 

toague to r^ulate the opening, and producing 
the notes by the tips of the fingers closing or 
opening the holes. 

The mechanical devices in this automaton 
are so beautifiil and so scientifically thought out, 
that I am only sorry that time will not permit 
me to describe them in detail, but I will try and 
make its general principles dear. 

Within the pedestal was a train of wheel-work 
driven by a weight, which set into motion a small 
shaft on which were six cranks disposed at equal 
angular distances around it ; to these six cranks 
as many pairs of bellows were attached (their 
inlet valves being mechanically opened and 
closed so as to make them silent in action). 
The air supplied by these bdlows was conveyed 
to three different wind chests, one loaded with 
' a weight of four pounds, one with a weight of 
two pounds, and the last having only the weight 
of its upper board. These wind chests commu- 
nicated with three little chambers in the body 
of the figure, and these chambers were all con- 

Digitized by 

Google 

62 AUTOMATA 

nected with the windpipe which passed up the 
throat to the cavity of the mouth and tenninated 
in the two movable lips which, between them« 
formed an orifice that could be protruded or 
drawn back, and might be fhrther modified by 
the action of the tongue. 

The train of wheels also set into motion a 
cylinder twenty inches in diameter and two feet 
six inches long ; on this were fixed a number of 
brass bars of difierent lengths and thicknesses 
which in their revolution acted upon a row of 
fifteen keys or levers; three of these corre*. 
sponded to the three litde wind chambers con^ 
taming air at difierent pressures, and, by means 
of little diains, operated their respective valves. 
There were seven levers set apart for operating 
the fingers, their respective chains making bends 
at the shoulders and elbows of the automaton, 
and tenmnated at the wrist in the ends of what 
I may call metacarpal levers attached to the 
fingers which were armed at then: tips with 
leather to imit^ite the fiesh of the natural hand. 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. . 63 

The motion of the mouth was controlled by 
four of the levers, one to open the lips so as^to 
give to the wind a greater issue, one to iMing 
them closer together, and so contract the pas- 
sage, a third to draw the lips backward and 
away from the flute, and the fourth to push them 
forward over the edge of the embouchure. 

The last of the fifteen levers is the cleverest 
of all, for it has the power of controlling the 
tongue, an accomplishment which I think every- 
one {unless he be an Odd Volume) will agree 
with me is a very difficult one to acquire. 

The barrel woiiied upon a screwed bearing 
(similar to that of the cylinder of a phonograph), 
so that in its revolution all the levers described 
a spiral line sixty^four indies long, and, as the 
barrel during the performance made twelve re- 
volutions it followed that the levers passed over 
a distance of no less than 768 inches in going 
through its performance of twelve tunes. 

In a Memoir read before the Acad^mie des 
Sciences, M. Vaucanson described the very 

Digitized by 

Google 

64 AUTOMATA 

beautiful methods by whieh the barrel was set 
outy and by which the positions of the bars were 
determined on its suifiice so as to r^ulate the 
supply of air and to control the actions of the 
fingers, the motion of the lips and the move- 
ments of the tongue;- and he gave a most 
interesting analysis of the acoustics of wind in- 
struments ; but time will not permit me to make 
more than this passing reference to them. 

The picture on the screen (Fig. 21) is a pho* 
tographic reproduction of the plate attached to 
M. Vaucanson's Memoir (a somewhat rare little 
tract published in 1738) in which his three 
automata are shown, and I hold in my hand a 
copy of the translation by Dr. Desaguliers, 
published in London in 1742, which, the im- 
print tells us, was ^^sold at the long roam at the 
Opera House in the Haymarket^ where the me* 
ehanual figures are to be seen at i, 2, 5, and 7 
&clock in the aftemoon,^^ 

The second of Vaucanson's automata was his 
celebrated model of a duck, which he himself 

Digitized by 

Google 

Fig. 21. 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 6$ 

described in a letter to the Abb^ de la Fontaine 
in 1738. This extraordinarf .automaton (ac- 
oordii^ to the inventor's own account of it), ex- 
hftited a considerable amount of physiological 
and anatomical knowledge and the most pro* 
fiamd merhnniral skill, for in it the operation of 
eating, drinking^ and digestion, were very closely 
imitated The : duck stretched out its neck to 
take com from the hand, it swallowed it and dis- 
charged it in 'a digested condition, the digestion 
being effected not by trituration, but by dis- 
sohitioii, and (to quote the qitaint expressions 
of the inventor), ^^The matter digested in the 
stomach is conducted I7 pipes (as in an animal 
by the guts)^ quite to .the anus^ where there is a 
sphincter that lets it out. I don't pretend/^ 
he says, ^ to. give Uiis as a perfect digestion^ 
capable of producing blood and nu^tive par- 
ticles for tiie support of the animal I hope no- 
body will be so unkind as to upbndd me with 
pretendii^ to any such thing. I only pretend 
to imitate the ; mechanism of their action in 

E 

Digitized by 

Google 

66 AUTOMATA 

these things, /^., firsti to swallow the com; 
secondly, macerate or dissolve it; thirdly, to 
make it come out sensibly changed from what it 
was.'^ But (on the same authority), besides being 
furnished with a digestive system, the wings were 
anatomical imitations of nature ; not only was 
every bone imitated, but all the processes and 
eminences of each bone, and the joints were 
articulated as in a real animd. 

After having been wound up^ die duck ate 
and drank, played in the water with his bill, 
making what is described as a '* gugling " sound, 
rose up on its legs and sat down, flapped its 
wings, dressed its feathers with its bill, and per* 
formed all these different operations without 
requiring to be touched again. 

It is important, however, to point out that 
this digestion story can only be ** ^gested^* mm 
p^ano sa/is^ and this is supplied in the sequel 
which furnishes the explanation. In the year 
1840 the automaton was found hidden away 
in a garret in Berlin ; it was very much out of 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 67 

order, and a mechanician of the name of 
Geoiges Tiets undertook to repair it li was 
taken to Paris, and in the year 1844 was ex- 
hibited in the Place du Palais Royal. In the 
course of this exhibition one of the wings 
became deranged, and it was put into the 
hands of Robert-Houdin for repairs. Robert- 
Houdin took advantage of this opportunity for 
examining the so-called digestive system of the 
automaton, and he thus describes its action : 

''On pr^ntait k I'animal un vase dans lequtl 
^t de la graine baignant dans Teau. Le 
mouvement que fidsait le bee en barbotant 
divisait la nourriture et en facilitait' Tintroduc- 
tion dans un tuyau piac€ sous le bee inf^^rieur 
du canard ; I'eau et la graine, ainsi aspirds tom- 
baient dans une botte plac6e sous le ventre de 
rautamate^ laquelle se vidait toutes les trois ou 
quatre s^mces. L'dvacuation €tait chose pr^- 
par^ k I'avance ; une espbce de boullie, com- 
post de mie de pain colore de vert, €tait 
pouss^e par un coup de pompe et soigneuse- 

Digitized by 

Google 

6S AUTOMATA 

tnent leQue, sur un plateau e& aigent, comme 
prodoit d'une digestion aitifictelle^'' so that, 
after all, this woaderfbl digestion of Vaucansmi's 
duck was nothing moie than a clever trick. 

The third automaton of Vaucanson was a 
figure that played on a shepherd's pipe with aoe 
hand while it beat a drum with the other. The 
instrument played upon was a Uttle pipe with 
only three holes, and the different notes were pro^ 
duced by a greater or less pressure of air and a 
more or less closing of the holes, and every note, 
no matter how rapid was the succession, had to 
be modifi^ by the tongue. In this machine 
there were provided as many different pressures 
of air as there were notes to be sounded, and 
the mechanism by which these operations and 
the fingering of the keys were effected reflects 
the greatest credit on the memory of this 
remarkable man.^ 

^ Beckmaim in his " History of Inventions," says that 
these automata found their way to St. Petersburg, and 
that in 1764, he himself saw them at the Palace of 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 69 

llie Automaton duck of Vaticiinsdn was, to 
a certain extait, anticipated by the Comt^ de 
Gcnnes, Governor of the Island of Saint Chris- 
topher, who, we are told by P^ Labat, con- 
structed a peacock which could walk about and 
pick up grains of com, which it 8walk>wed and 
digested. I have no means of detertnining 
whether or not Vaucanson took the idea of his 
duck fix)m this automaton, but that Vaucanson 
had imitators theie is abundant evidence to 
prove. In the year 175 a, Du Moulin, a silver- 
smith, travelled all over Europe with automata 
similar to those of Vaucanson, and the^ were 
afterwards purchased in Nurembergi by Bereis, 
a counsellor of Helmstadt^ at whose place they 
were seen by Beckmann in 1754. 

In the year 1760, there was a writing auto- 
maton exhibited in Vienna, which was con- 
structed by Friedrich von Knaus, and about the 

Zarsko-Selo, where he learnt that they had been pur- 
chased from Vaucanson, but they were not, at that time, 
in working order. 

Digitized by 

Google 

70 AUTOMATA 

same time a number of very curious automata 
were made by Le Droz, of Chaux de Foads, in 
Neufchatel. One of these was a dock, pre- 
sented to the King of Spain, which had, in 
addition to several moving figures, a sheep 
that bleated in a very natural way, and a dog 
mounting guard over a basket of fruit ; if anyone 
attempted to touch the basket the dog barked 
and growled, and if any of the fruit were taken 
away the barking continued until it was restored. 
The son of this man (who lived at Geneva), 
was no less skilful a mechanician, for he made a 
gold snuffbox about 4^^ inches long by 3 inches 
broad, in which when a spring was touched a 
little door flew open and a beautifully modelled 
bird of green enamelled gold rose up, fluttered 
its wings and tail, and commenced a trilling song 
of great beauty and power, its beak keeping time 
with the notes. Such a snuffbox was exhibited 
in the Great Exhibition of 185 1, proving as great 
a popular attraction as the Koh-i-nur diamond, 
and (owing to the kindness of my friend Mr. 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 71 

Tripplin the well-known horologist) I am now 
able to show you one of these very beautiful 
triumphs of mechanical skill 

Another of the younger Le Droz's inventions 
was his celebrated drawing automaton, which was 
a life-size figure of a man sitting behind a table 
and holding a style in his hand. A sheet of 
vellum was placed on the table, and the figure 
b^^ to draw portraits of well-known persons 
with extraordinary correctness. This automaton 
was shown in London, and attracted considerable 
attention at the time. 

I must now re-introduce to you another old 
friend, first shown here by Brother Manning. 
Here he is ! a little acrobat that turns somer- 
saults backwards down stairs. This is not, as 
many have thought, an invention of that great 
mechanical genius, Robert -Houdin, for it is 
figured and described in Musschenbroeck's '^ In- 
troductio ad philosophiam naturalem,'' which 
was published in Leyden in 1762 (a year after 
the author's death), and half a century before 

Digitized by 

Google 

72 AUTOMATA 

Robert-Houdin was boni^ and on Ae screen 
yott have a facsimile (Fig. iz) of Musscbenr'- 
broeck's illustration of this mechanical toy, 
which he refers to as ^^ an old invention of the 
Chinese.'' It is also described by Oaaaam in 
his '' Recr&itions Math^matiques et Plaques,** 

Fig. 22. 

the first edition of which was published in 1694. 
The figure I now throw on the screen (Fig. 23), 
is taken firom the second edition of this work 
which was edited by Mcmtuda in 1790. .Hie 
principle is exceedingly simple ; the whole thing 
depends upon tl^e centre of gravity being sa^* 
denly changed 1^ a shifting weight Within a 

Digitized by 

Google 

Fig* as. 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 

74 AUTOMATA 

tube contained within the body, is a small 
quantity of mercury, and the moment that this 
tube is inclined to the horizon the mercury 
flows to the lower end tilting one figure over 
the other, and with such force that it is carried 
over by its inertia far enough to tilt the tubes, 
and cause the mercury to flow to the opposite 
end, and the process is repeated as long as 
there are stairs to descend; by a very simple 
arrangement of strings passing over pulleys, the 
legs and arms are always brought into suitable 
positions to support the figure in every position 
of its descent. 

I now come to the automaton which for 
some years was the wonder of every countiy in 
Europe, the automaton chess-player of the 
Baron Wolfgang von Keinpelen, constructed m 
1776. This automaton was a life-size sitting 
figure dressed as a Turk, and having before it a 
large rectangular chest or cabinet, 3 feet 6 inches 
long, 2 feet deep, and 2 feet 6 inches high, on 
the top of which was a chessboard and a set of 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 7$ 

men* The seat on which the figure sat, was 
attached to the cabinet and the whole was on 
castors, so that it could be wheeled about the 
floor. When the automaton was eriiibited, the 
ediibitor began operations by opening the doors 
of the cabinet so as to show its contents, and 
here I will thsow on the screen a copy (Fig. 14) 
of one of the plates in a curious pamphlet,^ 
printed anonymously in 1821, but probably by 
Professor Willis. It must, however, be recol- 
lected that these doors were opened in succes- 
sion, and never all at the same time, but 
whichever door was opened, nothing could be 
seen but wheels, levers, connecting rods, strings 
and cylinders. After this the doors were closed 
and locked, the machinery was wound up, and 
the figure was ready to play a game of chess 
with any one who would challenge him. On 

^ '*An Attempt to Analyse the Antomaton Chess 
Player of Mr. de Kempelen, with an easy method of 
imitating the movements of that celebrated 6gure. II- 
Instrated by original drawings. 8vo. . London. l8ai/' 

Digitized by 

Google 

76 AUTOMATA 

commencing the game' the figcoe moved its 
head, and seemed to look alt every i^ait of the 
boanL When it checked the kii^, it aodded 
its head three timeSy aftd mhea it threatened 
the queen, it nodded twice. It also" shook 'its 
head when its adversary ntade a &lse move, 
and replaced the oAndiHg piece. It nearly 
alwa3rs wcm the game, bat occasionally lost. 

When it was completed, it was exhibited m 
Riga, Moscow, St. P^etersburg, Baffin, Presbmg 
and Vienna, coming to London ih 1783, and 
having been seen by many thousands during 
those years with out its secret being discovered, 
but in the year 1789, a book was published by 
Mr. Freyherre of Dresden, in which he showed 
that " a well taught boy very thin and tall of his 
age, (sufficiently so that he could be concealed 
in a drawer below the chess-boaf d,) agitated the 
whole.** In the plate before you, you will see 
that the author has shown in dotted Ifhes, the 
position a boy might take when the left hand 
door was opened. 

Digitized by 

Google 

Fig. 24- 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 

78 AUTOMATA 

The real story of this most ingenious and suc- 
cessful scientific fraud is so interesting that 
I must tell it here, although it puts for ever 
Baron von Kempden's chess-player outside the 
circle of true automata. In the year 1776, a 
regiment, half Russian and half Polish, mutinied 
at Riga. The mutineers were defeated,* and 
thdr chief officer, Worouski, fell, havingiiad both 
his thighs fractured by a cannon ball He hid 
himself in a ditch until after dark, when he 
dragged himself to the neighbouring house of a 
doctor named Osloff, a man of great benevo- 
lence, who took him in and concealed him, but 
he had to amputate both his legs. During the 
time of Worouski's illness, Osloff was visited by 
his intimate friend the Baron von Kempelen, 
and after many consultations and much thought, 
Kempelen hit -upon the idea of conveying him 
out of the country by devising this automaton 
(as Worouski was a great chess-player), and in 
three months the figure was finished. 

In order to avoid suspicion he gave per- 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 79 

fonnances en rouie to the frontier. The first 
perfc^ance was given at Toula, on the 6th 
of November, 1777 (that is to say exactly 114 
years ago to-day). The machine and Worouski 
were packed in a case and started for Prussia, 
but when they reached Riga, orders came firom 
the Empress Katherine II., for Baron von 
Kempden to go to St. Petersburg with his 
automaton. The Empress played several games 
with him, but was always beaten, and then she 
wanted to buy the figure. This was an awkward 
situation fot Kempelen, and he was at his wits' 
end to know how to wriggle out of it. He de- 
clared that his own presence was absolutely 
necessary for the working of the machine, and 
that it was quite impossible for him to sell 
it, and, after some further discussion, he was 
allowed to proceed on his journey. 

This chess-player was, in the same year, pur- 
chased by Mons. Anthon, who took it all over 
Europe. At his death it came into the hands of 
Johann Maelzel, the inventor of the Metronome, 

Digitized by 

Google 

8o AUTOIIATA 

who sent it to the United Stittes. It was after- 
wards sent back to Europe, and in the year 1844 
was in the possessiim of a medianician of Belle^ 
ville, named Crotzier. 

Maelzel himself was a mechanician of very 
considerable skill, and he constructed an auto* 
maton trumpeter, which was exhibited at 
Vienna about the year 1804, which played the 
Austrian and French cavahy marches, and 
marehes and aIl^;ros by Weigl, Dussek, and 
Pleyel. Maelsd was, after that, appointed 
mechanician to the Austrian Court, and con- 
structed an automatic orchestra, in which trum- 
pets, flutes, daiiottets, vioUns, violonodlosj 
drums, cymbals, and a triangle, were intzo- 
duced, and this attracted, very great interest 
in the Austrian capital at die time. 

In the year 1773 there was in ^ring Gardens, 
near Charing Cross, a most remarkable collec- 
ti<m of automata exhibited in a place of enter- 
tainment known as Cox's Museum, and here 
I have an original copy of the *^ Descriptive 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 8i 

catalogue, of the several superb and magnificent 
pieces of mechanism and jewellery exhibited in 
Mr. Coj^s Museumy at Spring Gardens, Charing 
CrossJ^ To which this footnote is added, 
** Hours of Admission^ ii, 2, and 7, every day 
{Sundays excepted\ tickets Haifa Guinea each, 
admitting one person, to be had at Mr. Cos^s, 
No. 103, Shoe Lane.^^ This was a very extra- 
ordinary exhibition, and contained upwards of 
twenty large and elaborate automata, several 
of them being adorned with gold and precious 
stones. Some were complicated clocks, some 
were large groups of animals, and figures with 
fountains and cascades around them. None of 
these objects was less than nine feet high, and 
some were as high as sixteen feet. I can find 
nothing important enough firom a Mechanick's 
point of view, to describe in detail, but it was 
the precursor in the same place of the exhibition 
of Monsieur Maillardet, which was one of the 
London attractions at the beginning of the 
present century. 

Digitized by 

Google 

82 AUTOMATA 

M. MaiUardet exhibited a bird automaton 
(similar to that ahready referred to which was 
made by Le Dros), and whose performance 
lasted four minutes with one winding up. He 
constructed also a spider, entirely of steel, 
which imitated all the actions of the real animal, 
it ran round and round the table in a spiral line^ 
tending towards the centre. MaiUardet made 
automata representing a caterpillar, a mouse, a 
lizard, and a serpent ; the last crawled about all 
over the table, darted its tongue in and out, and 
produced a hissing sound. 

Maillardet's most important automata were, 
however, his drawing and writing figure, and his 
pianoforte player. The former was a kneeling 
boy, who wrote in ink with an ordinary pen, 
sentences in English and in French, and drew 
landscapes. The pianist was a figure of a lady, 
who performed eighteen pieces of music. She 
began by bowing to the audience, her bosom 
heaved, and her eyes first looked at the music, 
and then followed the motion of her fingers, and 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AMD NEW. 83 

the music was produced by the keys being played 
on by the fingers; but the most remarkable 
of M. Maillardef s machines, was a magician, or 
fbrtime-teller, which gave answers to some 
twenty given questions, which were inscribed on 
as many counters or medallions. One of these 
medallions having been put into a drawer, the 
figure arose firom his seat, bowed to the audience, 
and described mystic circles in the air with his 
wand; after appearing to consult his book of 
mysteries, he struck a little door behind him, 
which flew open, and exhibited an appropriate 
answer to the question on the medallion. 

The general principle upon which this auto- 
maton's power of selection was founded lay in 
the fact that in the edge of each medallion there 
was a small hole drilled, but no two holes were 
drilled to the same depth, and, by an exceed- 
ingly delicate mechanism, the varying depth to 
which a pin could be thrust into the edge of 
a disc, was caused to control the mechanism by 
which the various answers were selected, and 

Digitized by 

Google 

S4 AUTOMATA 

which were exhibited when the little door flew 
open. 

The next great master of automaton design 
and construction, was that wonderful genius 
Robert-Houdin (about whom our worthy Secre- 
tary and Seer discoursed to us so pleasantly and 
so instructively nearly a year ago). Brother 
Manning's paper was so complete in itself, and 
that part of it which dealt with automata was so 
ably illustrated, that it will be quite unnecessary 
for me to add to the length of this communica- 
tion, by going over that ground again, so I will 
merely enumerate the automata of that interest- 
ing man and pass on to still more recent times. 

The first of the automata of Robert-Houdin 
was a confectioner's shop, in which a pastry- 
cook came out of the door when requested and 
offered to the spectators patisserie, bonbons, and 
refreshments of every description, and within 
the shop might be seen the assistants making 
pastry, rolling out the dough, and putting it into 
the oven. Then he made two clowns, known as 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 85 

Auriol and D^bureau. The first of these per- 
formed a number of acrobatic feats upon a 
chair which was held at arm's length by the 
other. After this, the figure of Auriol smoked 
a pipe, and accompanied on the flageolet an air 
played by the orchestra. 

Another was an acrobat which performed 
tricks on the trapeze, and the last to which I 
shall refer, was his celebrated writing figure, 
which is illustrated in Brother Manning's " Opus- 
culum," No. XXIV., to which I must refer you 
for a great deal of interesting information re- 
specting that remarkable man. 

A contemporary of Robert-Houdin was Mons. 
Mareppe, who constructed a very wonderful 
automaton violin player, and which was ex- 
hibited at the Conservatoire at Paris, in the 
^ear 1838, and which performed on the violin 
by bowing and fingering the strings, and in 
an account of the performance which was pub- 
lished at the time in << Galignani's Messenger," 
it is stated that the musical execution was so 

Digitized by 

Google 

86 AUTOMATA 

perfect as to bring tears into the eyes of the 
audience. 

Coming to our own period, from the time of 
Robert-Houdin, there have been no great auto- 
mata which will live in the history of the subject, 
until the year 1875, when Mr. J. N. Maskelyne 
(who, I am happy to tell you, is honouring us with 
his presence to-night) exhibited at the Egyptian 
Hall his marvellous ''Psycho." This was a 
seated figure, supported by a cylindrical pede- 
stal of glass which stood upon a little platform, 
and, being on castors, could be wheeled about the 
floor. This automaton can actually play a game 
of whist, selecting the cards from a rack in front 
of it, and playing a most skilful game. The 
machine works apparently without any mechani- 
cal connection with anything outside, and the 
delicacy and precision of its actions, display the 
most consummate skill in design, and give to 
its inventor a high position for mechanical 
science. This automaton also works out arith- 
metical calculations, with numbers from one to 

Digitized by 

Google 

OLD AND NEW. 87 

a hundred millions, showing the result behind a 
door whidi opens in front of its box. 

Another of Mr. Maskelyne's automata, is the 
celebrated ''Zoe " of 1877, a sitting figure sup- 
ported like the last on a glass pedestal so as to 
exclude the possibility of an electrical system of 
communication. A sheet of paper is fastened 
on to the table in front, and the figure traces out 
very fair portraits of public characters chosen by 
the audience out of a list of some two hundred 
names. 

In respect to these most beautiful machines I 
must refrain from revealing to you the secrets of 
their working, and that for two reasons, first, 
because I do not know them myself; and 
secondi because Mr. Maskelyne is here and is 
doubtless only impatient to jump up when I sit 
down and tell us all about them. 

i do not intend to say anything about speak- 
ing machines or to do more than make a pass- 
ing reference to the very interesting work and 
researches of Kircher m 1650, Van Helmont, 

Digitized by 

Google 

88 AUTOMATA 

1667, Kratzenstein, in 1780, L'Abb^ Mical, in 
17^3* Von Kempelen in 1791, Willis in 1829, 
Wheatstone in 1837, or of Faber in 1862. All 
these mechanicians and physicists studied the 
philosophy of speech and produced machines or 
parts of machines, which could utter vowels, 
words or even sentences, but these machines 
were operated by keys and stops and were, in no 
sense of the term, automata. 

I must, however, refer to one of the greatest 
marvels of modem science, the phonograph 
which Mr. Edison has applied in the construction 
of his talking dolls. Edison's talking doll is a 
figure, within which a little phonograph, driven 
by a little winch, b concealed, and which repeats 
in a clear voice any sentence or rhyme which 
may have been spoken against its recording 
cylinder or disc. I am deeply disappointed to 
be unable to show you one of these most inte* 
resting automata to-night, for one is on its way 
to me across the Atlantic. Colonel Gourand 
very kindly sent for one that I might show it to 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 

OLD AND NEW. 89 

you this evening, and I deeply regret that it has 
not arrived in time, for the Odd Volumes would, 
otherwise, have been the first to hear its voice in 
Europe.^ 

In the phonograph, that splendid triumph of 
acoustical and mechanical science, we have 
literally fulfilled, the prediction made by Sir 
David Brewster in 1883, when he wrote ''I 
have no doubt that before another century is 
completed, a talking and a singing Machine will 
be numbered among the conquests of Science." 

No one who is familiar with any of the great 
European capitals can have failed to notice in 
the windows of the higher class of toy-shops, 
clock-work automata of various kinds. We have 
jugglers and rope dancers, conjurers, pianists, 
violinists, harpists and trumpeters, dancing nig- 
gers, figures fighting, knitting, sewing, writing, 
and engaged in almost every occupation per- 

^ The author exhibited Edison's talking doU at the 
Conversazione of the Sette of Odd Volumes which was 
held the foUowing month. 

Digitized by 

Google 

90 AUTOMATA 

formed by human beings, but none that I have 
seen are fit for comparison with the wonderful 
mechanical works of Vaucanson, Robert-Houdtn 
or Maskelyne ; mechanically they are nearly 
identical with one another, and differ only in the 
external application of tbt internal machinery. 
At Litemational Exhibitions one sees one or two 
of superior merit, but I have not recently seen 
any of sufficient importance to bring before you 
this evening. Tlie pianists and other musicians 
merely move their bands on their instruments, 
but the music (save the mark) whether it be a 
violin or a trumpet, comes from a musical «iuff- 
box inside which is generally wound up by a 
different key. These figures are usually very 
costly, and I am always puzzled to know who are 
the people who purchase them. The best are 
generally those mechanical toys which represent 
the movements of animals, and here I have a 
mechanical bear which is rather amusing, and it 
is ingenious because by a very simple combina- 
tion of clock work with cranks and strings a 
CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTION 

Robots have been utilized in the manufacturing environment since 1961 when a Uni- 
mation robot was installed at a General Motors plant to tend a die casting machine. Since 
that time, thousands of robots have been installed world-wide, the majority in metal 
working or other 'heavy' industrial applications. The first applications usually involved 
the handling of items in hostile environments, such as those found around furnaces or die 
casting machines [1]. 

Improved accuracy and control made applications in spot welding and paint spraying 
viable, as these tasks would also expose humans to hostile surroundings. The improved 
accuracy also opened robotics to applications outside of traditional heavy industries in- 
cluding: automated assembly and inspection of electronic components, template guided 
drilling and machining of aerospace components and even decorating chocolate candies on 
an assembly line [2]. 

Still, there are limitations in the accuracy and control of robots, reducing the number of 
applications in industry. As CAD AM type systems become the standard for machine tools, 
the limitations of robots become more evident. Presently, most robots are programmed 
by manually teaching each move and position required to perform the task. This does 
not present a serious problem when the task is to be repeated continuously or at frequent 
intervals. However, this method of programming becomes impractical for applications 
involving low volume or non-repeated tasks as often encountered in the aero-space industry. 
For applications of robots in this area of low volume production, two enhancements 
are required to provide economic production. First, allow off-line programing of robots 
in a manner similar to other numerically controlled machine tools. Second, improve the 
absolute positional accuracy of robots so that the taught position will meet the manufac- 
turing tolerances of the part to be machined. When robots are programmed with teach 

pendants, the repeatability at the tool of a typical robot is approximately +/- 0.010 inch 
(0.254 mm), which meets the tolerance requirements of most components. However, the 
absolute positioning error approaches +/- 0.10 inch (2.54 mm) when the same robot is 
taught off-line. These errors are too great and must be corrected. Currently, rigid tem- 
plates are used to increase the accuracy of the tool mounted on the robot. An alternative 
method to improving the accuracy of the robot may be achieved in part by modeling those 
factors which reduce robot accuracy and include their eifects in the robot controller. 

The overall task of this research was to develop a templateless edge milling technique 
which could be installed on an existing industrial robot. As the initial task was investi- 
gated, several additional tasks were discovered which required examination. Mainly, these 
tasks involved improving the motion capabilities of the manipulator. 

The primary effort for the remainder of this work is focused on providing practical 
methods of improving the quality of motion of an existing industrial robot. Several areas 
affecting the accuracy of the robot were explored: eliminating deflections of the end effector 
due to structural flexibilities, and improving the straight line motion capabilities of the 
robot. As a by-product of this work, a high resolution, fast response active end effector was 
produced to provide the necessary compensation displacement. Additionally, a method to 
improve the dynamic response of the manipulator was investigated, resulting in a dynamic 
compensator being built and tested on the base axis of the robot. 

Industrial robots are currently used to mill the edges of complex three dimensional 
sheet metal parts of aircraft and spacecraft. When using templates, the robot is "ap- 
proximately" programmed for the desired contour of the workpiece and a compliant end 
effector equipped with rollers follows the rigid template. In this way, errors in the desired 
motion of the robot can be eliminated, and accurately machined workpieces will be pro- 
duced. However, the templates themselves must be accurately machined for each different 
workpiece. This limits the flexible machining nature of the robot and adds a great deal of 
cost to limited production items. 

Therefore, to increase the productivity of the robot and to reduce the manufacturing 

costs of these components, the use of templates must be eliminated. However, when 
templates are eliminated, the resulting manufactured items are of sub-standard quality, 
caused by motion errors of the robot. Specific causes of these motion errors will be 
described later in this chapter; however, three general categories have been investigated 
and they include: 

t The transient errors due to the inadequate dynamics of the servo drives of the robot. 

• The deflection errors at the end effector due to the applied, variable cutting forces 
during the edge milhng operation. 

• The errors in the motion of the robot due to path generation errors and coarse 
resolution of the servo loops. 

Practical methods to eliminate the errors of motion described above were also examined, 
implemented and the results will be described later. 

Background 

Presently, much time and effort has been expended on improving the positional ac- 
curacy of standard industrial robots. Recent applications for robots with high positional 
accuracies include: 

• Inspection of parts for dimensional accuracy. 

• Templateless metal removal. 

• Precision assembly tasks. 

• Applications where position commands are down loaded from CAD systems. 

In the past twenty years, robots have been used in a large number of applications, 
ranging from nuclear maintenance to automobile manufacturing to electronic assembly. 
They are generally flexible, re-programmable and repeatable from cycle to cycle. However, 
for many of the new industrial applications, good repeatabihty is insufficient to satisfy the 
application requirements. Improved accuracy is also required from the robots. 

Accuracy is defined as a measure of the difference between the commanded posi- 
tion/trajectory of the end effector and the actual position/trajectory of the end effector. 

■1 

The position of the end effector is most commonly commanded in global coordinates, 

fixed to the base of the robot, and is especially useful in offline programming of the robot. 

Repeatability is defined as the difference in position/trajectory of the robot for repeated 

cycles of a commanded position/trajectory of the robot [3]. Repeatability issues are very 

important for motion which are taught online, usually with a teach pendant. 

The importance of accuracy in robots has been recognized in the early years by the 
pioneers of the industry including Bejczy, Paul, Roth and Whitney. Through the years, 
the development of improved kinematic and dynamic algorithms, sensors and controllers 
have been witnessed. All of this has led to improved accuracy of robots; however, with 
the advancement of off-line CAD based robot path planning and other requirements for 
greater positional accuracy, the improvements fall short. Additional methods need to be 
developed to span the gap. 

Before the trajectory errors can be eliminated, the causes of the errors should be 
determined. Day [4] has identified, described and grouped a number of factors which 
influence the accuracy of robots: 

1. 'Environmental factors' such as temperature, humidity, and electrical noise. 

2. 'Kinematic factors' such as in-accurate joint lengths, misaligned joints, and other 
manufacturing defects. 

3. 'Dynamic factors' such as structural flexibilities, drive train flexibilities, friction pa- 
rameters, varying inertial loads and other non-linearities like backlash and hysteresis. 

4. 'Measurement factors' such as resolution and non-linearities of encoders, resolvers, 
etc. 

5. 'Computational factors' such as robot path computation errors due to round-off, 
steady state control errors, errors due to dropped bits, feedback control methods. 

etc. 

6. 'Application factors' such as installation errors, part presentation errors, errors in 
defining part location or coordinate frame and errors in defining location of the 
end-of-tool. 

These factors influence both the accuracy and the repeatability of the robot. The 
efforts of this research focus on robot repeatabihty issues of robot motion; however, im- 
provements in the repeatabihty of the robot usually help to improve the accuracy of the 
robot and vice-versa. Each factor causing errors in accuracy and repeatability may not be 
totally independent from one another. For instance, a large temperature change affects 
link length, friction coefficients, drifts in control electronics and measurement sensitivity. 

To further understand the needs of the templateless edge milling operation, a descrip- 
tion of the operation will be presented in the next section. 

Templateless Edge Milhng 

Robots are currently being used for edge milling operations in the aircraft and space- 
craft industry. Similar robotic applications include: drilling, deburring and riveting with 
templates. 

A template provides a rigid surface for the routing end effector to follow, as shown in 
Figure 1.1. The spring-loaded roller follower always remains in contact with the template 
because the force provided by the compressed spring more than offsets any cutting forces 
produced by the milhng operation. Thus, as long as the roller followers remain in contact 
with the template, the path of the tool, and the shape of the workpiece is defined. Any 
contour errors of the template result in errors of the workpiece. To eliminate or reduce 
these errors, the templates must be expertly manufactured and rigidly clamped to the 
workpiece. The costs of producing these templates are large, especially when considering 
that a different template must be made for each different type of part to machined. 

The following description of a routing (or edge milling) task was taken from a robotics 

Figure 1.1: Template Following End Effector For Edge Milling 

ad-hoc study of a major aircraft manufacturer: 

The formed part is positioned on a contoured fixture and pinned to it 
with hold down screws. A routing blanket is then applied and pinned to the 
fixture. The T3 Cincinnati Milacron Robot is programmed to traverse the 
routed profile and the attached 'DOTCO' router actually cuts the material. 
The parts, as per the existing manufacturing method, are trimmed to +.030" 
or as directed by the trim allowance of the routing blanket .... The robot 
has been developed to replace manual routing of these parts. A special end 
effector was developed to hold a 1/2 H.P. air driven 'DOTCO' router for this 
job. We have found the 1/4" two fluted router bit (TRM 67.09-108-lTl) to be 
the best cutter for the application. Increase of efHciency: 3 times vs. manual 
routing. [5] pp 35-36. 

Thus, routing blankets or templates were used to guide the robot and the parts were 
trimmed to +0.030 inch (0.76 mm). For parts requiring greater precision, other methods 
would have to be employed. 

When large runs of a siiigle part are made, the cost of the template for that part is 
distributed over the complete lot of parts. However, for runs of 100 parts or less (common 
for aircraft or spacecraft) the distributed costs of the template is quite large. In addition, 
the use of templates limit the flexibility of the robot production because the manufacturing 
of these templates increase the leadtime for production, new templates must be made for 

each new parts, and the templates have to be altered each time a modification is made 

to the existing part. For these reasons, robots are sometimes not chosen for the routing, 

drilling, or riveting operations. By eliminating the need for the template, the number of 

robotic applications in aircraft manufacturing and other industries could rise significantly. 

An additional project in the previously mentioned ad-hoc report included the following 

proposal: 

Our prime objective in this research project is to improve the dynamic po- 
sitioning precision of current robots so they can perform template-free drilling 
and routing operations. We have developed the sensor concepts to improve 
the accuracy of the robot. The first concept uses six accelerometers to sense 
the six parameters describing the position of a body in space. As the robot 
moves, each accelerometer will have its acceleration data double integrated to 
determine the current position and orientation of the robot from a reference 
position. The position and orientation is compared with the programmed po- 
sition and orientation of the robot for that moment to find the appropriate 
amount of correction needed, the computer then transforms the amount of 
correction into corrective motions of the robot, thereby reducing the position 
error.... [6] pp 44-45. 

In addition, another aircraft manufacturer has installed a large gantry type robot 
to perform "Templateless Robotic Drilling of Complex Aerospace Assembhes," [7]. It is 
evident that templateless manufacturing is definitely being pursued by the giants of the 
aircraft industry. However, the large tolerances of up to -f/- 0.030 inch (0.76 mm) limit 
the number of applications, unless additional techniques are used to reduce the tolerances. 
What causes these tolerances to be so great on current templateless methods? 

First, by examining the metal removal process, whether it be milling, grinding or 
drilling, a partial explanation will be evident. During any metal removal operation, forces 
are produced by the interaction of the workpiece and the tool. For some operations, the 
forces can be quite large. In this work, the discussion will be limited to cutting forces as 
they relate to edge milling, but similar effects are seen during the other metal removal 
applications mentioned earlier. A detailed description of cutting mechanics can be found 
in Chapter 4. 

The average cutting force is proportional to the metal removal rate (MRR). For typical 
robotic edge milling operations, forces on the order of to 50 pounds (0 to 224 N) can 

8 

be encountered. Because all structures are flexible, including robots, the applied cutting 
forces result in unwanted displacements at the end effector, and if the deflections are not 
compensated for, errors in the workpiece are the result. For the T3-776 robot, uncorrected 
deflections of over 0.10 inch (2.5 mm) could result when forces equal to the rated capacity 
of the robot, 150 pounds, (667 N) were applied. Techniques which eliminate errors due to 
flexibilities of the cutting forces must be implemented. 

There are two distinct characteristics associated with the cutting forces generated 
during edge milhng: 

1. The flexibilities of the robot are position dependant, thus as the robot moves along 
its desired trajectory, the flexibility of the structure changes. 

2. The stock to remove (flash) varies because the rough shape of the workpiece was 
only approximately produced by shearing, thus the cutting forces change as the 
robot moves along its path. 

If the cutting force or the flexibility of the robot remained constant during the milling 
operation, the problems associated with structural flexibilities would be greatly simplified. 
This is not the case; however, and the effects of flexibilities must be taken into account. 

The displacement at the tool can be accurately predicted if the applied cutting forces 
and structural flexibilities are known. Symbolically, the deflection at the tool, Tdeji can 
be expressed as: 

Tdefi = [FLEX]{Force} (1.1) 

where [FLEX] denotes the position dependant flexibility matrix of the robot, and {Force} 
is the applied cutting force. Because the cutting force varies as the flash varies, the cutting 
forces must be monitored in real time for proper deflection compensation. In a similar 
manner, the position dependant flexibility matrix must be updated continuously. 

Stern [8] provided a detailed model of the flexibility characteristics of the Cincinnati 
Milacron T3-776 robot used in this research. The model was derived using dynamic 

9 

modeling methods. Sklar [9] modeled the same type of robot using static measurement 
techniques, and the flexibility model of the T3-776 robot closely match Stern's work. 

By incorporating a force/torque dynamometer at the wrist of the robot, the cutting 
forces could be monitored in real time. By multiplying the position dependant flexibility 
matrix of the robot and the measured forces/torques, the displacement of the tool could 
be accurately predicted in real time. This method of determining the displacement of the 
tool is described in detail in Chapter 4. 

Once the displacement of the tool is predicted, a method for compensating must be 
established. Three methods of compensation were considered: 

1. Command the robot to provide the corrective motion. 

2. Use an active workpiece fixture so that corrective motions can be commanded of the 
workpiece rather than the tool. 

3. Incorporate an active end eifector, so that corrective motions can be commanded 
directly to the tool. 

The first method seems the most practical at first glance, but to be successful, several 
difficult tasks must occur in real time. The computed displacement of the tool must be 
back transformed into joint coordinates, the computed compensation displacement must 
be added to the original commanded position of the joint controller, and the joint servo 
must respond instantaneously. The back transformation can be done rather quickly, and 
the displacement change of the joint can be implemented if knowledge of the controller is 
available from the manufacturer. However, the typical response of the joint servos is rather 
slow, in the case of the shoulder and elbow bandwidths are on the order of 1 Hz. Thus, 
this method of providing the necessary compensation displacement was not pursued. 

The second compensation technique incorporates an active fixture. The fixture would 
move the required amount to eliminate the error of the tool. This method of compensation 
has two major advantages over the previous method, the compensation displacements do 
not have to be back transformed to robot joint coordinates, and a dedicated controller 

10 

could be used to command motions of the fixture. However, two disadvantages arise, the 
first being that up to six degrees-of-freedom would be required for the fixture depending 
on the complexity of the workpiece. Secondly, for large or heavy workpieces, powerful 
servos would be required, greatly increasing the cost of the system. 

The final compensation technique utilizes a single degree-of-freedom active end effector. 
By orienting the motion of the device to be normal to the desired trajectory of the tool, 
the displacement errors of the tool can be eliminated. The active end effector would have 
the following attributes: 

• High resolution motion. 

• High bandwidth of operation. 

• Compact, self contained device. 

• Includes a dedicated controller which calculates the necessary corrective displace- 
ment. 

A single degree-of-freedom active end effector was actually built and used for the 
flexibility compensation. A complete description of that device can be found in Chapter 3. 

Straight Line Performance 

In addition to errors caused by structural deflections of the robot, straight line motion 
errors were substantial. For a typical commanded motion of the tool along a straight path, 
deviations of -|-/- 0.015 inch (0.38 mm) were common. These deviations from the straight 
line motion must be eliminated or substantially reduced before high precision motions of 
the tool can be effectively produced. 

In general, straight line motions of the robot are representative of most desired smooth 
motion of the robot. For many experiments, straight line motions have the distinct ad- 
vantages over other types of smooth motions (curved motions for example) in that they 
are much simpler to program, and records of the motion are easier to obtain. Thus by 

11 

developing methods which improve the straight line motion of the end effector, smooth 
motions in general may be enhanced. 

There are many factors which affect the straight line motion of the end effector, in- 
cluding: kinematic factors, measurement factors and computational factors. Each of these 
factors contributes to the errors at the end effector, but in many cases it is difficult to 
separate the effect of each factor and compensate individually. So these sources of error 
were compiled to a single group of those factors which affect the straight line motion of 
the robot. 

For the straight line compensation scheme developed, knowing the cause of the error 
was not necessary. However, the magnitude of the normal displacement of the tool was 
required so that it could be accurately eliminated. For example, if the displacement error 
was either directly measured or observed, the value could be eliminated by one of the 
compensation methods mentioned previously. 

The compensation scheme could incorporate either an open or closed loop architecture. 
For the closed loop method, where the normal displacement is measured, all deflection 
errors could be eliminated. This could be done in a number of ways, but the results 
are the same, if the actual positional error can be measured, then all deflection errors, 
regardless of their source, can be eliminated. However, these methods are impractical for 
one reason or another, so an open loop, or relative compensation scheme was introduced. 

The open loop or relative compensation technique may incorporate various sensors 
and methods to provide an estimate of the normal displacement of the tool. The method 
involved using an accelerometer, double integrating its output, and using that informa- 
tion for straight line motion compensation. This method will be described in detail in 
Chapter 5. 

Dynamic Compensation 

•Dynamic compensation is a closely related topic to the area of improving the motion 
of the end effector of the robot. For the particular task of edge milling, the dynamic 

12 

performance of the robot is not a major factor. In most edge milling operations, the 
robot is programmed to traverse along the path at approximately 5 to 15 inch/min (127 
to 381 mm/min). For these relatively low speeds, and relatively low mass of the router 
and holder, the dynamic response of the robot does not change significantly. 

In other applications, where the robot is either commanded to move quickly or carry 
heavy loads or both, the dynamic affects can be significant. For example, observing the 
base axis of the T3-776 robot, depending on the position of the end effector, the inertial 
load at the crown gear can vary in a ratio of 12:1. Without providing some type of 
compensation, the dynamic response of the base could vary significantly. 

Thus, various methods to improve the dynamic response of the servo systems were 
investigated. For several years, researchers have attempted to develop real time torque 
control strategies for robots instead of the traditional method of position control. By 
using a torque control strategy, the dynamic motion of the manipulator would be closely 
controlled, instead of the current problem of how to predict the motion of the robot when 
positional control methods are employed. 

However, several problems are encountered in the torque control method. The com- 
plexity of dynamic torque control is seen in the following equation: 

n n n 

ri^aiiqii+ Y^ aijQj + J^'^biji.qjqk + Ci + diqi (1.2) 

where 

n = joint number 

qi — position of joint i 

qi = velocity of joint i 

qi - acceleration of joint i 

Ti — the drive torque at joint i 

an — the effective inertia at joint % 

aij — the coupled inertia between i and j 

bijk = the Coriolis coefficient (j / k) and the centripetal coefficient (j=k) 

Cj- = the gravity force at joint i 

13 

di = the viscous friction coefficient for joint i 

It is apparent by the above equation that a robot is a multiple input, multiple output 
system described by a set of coupled, nonlinear differential equations, [10]. Many of the 
variables found in the above equation are difficult to quantify. For example, calculating the 
inertia of a particular link (or joint) is difficult, but it must be known accurately if torque 
control is to succeed. The friction coefficient di is a term that many researchers ignore 
completely, but it can be one of the most influential terms for robots which incorporate 
high gear ratios. This is another term which is difficult to directly quantify. 

Typically, most robot manufacturers simplify the above equation, resulting in a set of 
uncoupled linear equations with the following form: 

Ti = auqu + Ci (1.3) 

The coefficients an and c,- are considered position independent and the servo system can 
be optimized to meet a certain set of fixed conditions, ignoring the time and position 
dependant variables. For example, the robot manufacturer may optimize the response of 
the robot so that it provides a critically damped response for a median inertial load, where 
the inertial load is dependant on the position of the robot and any mass carried by the 
end effector. 

For inertial loads less than this median value, overshoots in response to commanded 
inputs would result. Conversely, for inertial loads greater than that median inertia, the 
response would be slower and more sluggish than wanted, because the system is over 
damped. By assuming a linear system, and using linear control methods, the response of 
the system can be highly non-uniform. 

As mentioned previously, researchers have attempted to use torque control schemes to 
improve the motion at the end effector. For specific motions of the robot, the detrimental 
effects of the time varying inertial loads could be eliminated or reduced if the load torque 
sensed by the actuator could be predicted and corrected for. If an accurate dynamic model 
of the robot could be produced, then by accurately measuring various parameters (link 

14 

position, velocity and acceleration), the estimated load torque could be used in a feed 
forward compensation scheme. 

However, for typical serial mechanisms with six degrees-of- freedom, the torque equa- 
tions become unwieldy and put a heavy computational burden on the control computer, 
which make them difficult to apply in real time. Additionally, estimating the various pa- 
rameters required for the dynamic model is a complex and time consuming task. Until 
recently, an accurate dynamic model required disassembly, careful measurements and then 
re-assembly of the manipulator. New methods have been devised which allow dynamic 
modeling to performed without disassembly, [11]. 

A new method has been devised which provides a direct method of observing the actual 
load torque sensed by the motor without having to produce a detailed dynamic model of 
the robot or implementing complex dynamic equations of motion in the controller. This 
method requires an accurate model of the motor, where the parameters are time and po- 
sition invariant. The parameters of the motor are typically supplied by the manufacturer, 
but if not, they are relatively easy to obtain by making a few simple measurements. In fact, 
this method of observed dynamic compensation can be applied using simple analog cir- 
cuits, which greatly reduce implementation costs. This method of dynamic compensation 
will be described in detail in Chapter 2. 

The original reason that these compensation methods were developed was to provide 
template free edge milUng of sheet metal components by robots. However, these com- 
pensation techniques are useful for a number of other applications including grinding, 
deburring, drilling and inspection tasks. By developing and implementing these compen- 
sation schemes, robots which were previously limited by their accuracy could be used for 
a number of new and more difficult applications. 

CHAPTER 2 
IMPROVING THE DYNAMIC RESPONSE OF THE ROBOT SERVO CONTROLLER 

In this section, several topics will be covered including a basic tutorial on the operation 
of a permanent magnet DC servomotor and a Pulsed Width Modulated (PWM) amplifier, 
effects of end effector position on the inertial load of the shoulder axis, an introduction 
to various methods of providing dynamic compensation, a spring/mass model of robot 
structure as related to the base joint, a model of the base axis of robot and its simulated 
model and the effects of implementing a dynamic compensation scheme on the base axis. 

Background on Dynamic Compensation of Manipulators 

Presently, the dynamic behavior of industrial robots with constant parameter con- 
trollers cannot provide optimal control over the entire robot work volume due to the 
changes in external loads torques sensed by the motor. For some load torque, each servo 
in the robot will provide an optimal response, but as the load torque changes the response 
will vary. Most servo controlled manipulators currently utilize linear feedback compensa- 
tion to control the position of each joint independently. This is not sufficient for dealing 
with the dynamic coupling between the joint motions which are non-linear and result from 
ever changing system configurations, gravity and other external loads. To compensate for 
these system non-linearities, several torque compensation schemes have been developed 
to predict the actuator torques for given specific motions. Unfortunately, some of these 
schemes put a heavy computational burden upon the control computer, which make them 
extremely difficult to apply in real time. 

For a given desired motion of the robot end effector, the required joint torques could 
theoretically be calculated and then commanded to the joint controllers and the correct 
motion be obtained. However, these complicated dynamic models require accurate in- 
formation of the robot including exact link geometry, and the mass and location of the 

15 

16 

center-of-mass for each link. In addition, position, velocity and acceleration of each link 
must be accurately monitored or observed in real time. In many instances, the man- 
ufacturer does not have the necessary modeling information. As mentioned previously, 
accurately modeling the mass and the location of the center-of-mass of a link required 
that the robot be disassembled and carefully measured [12]. A new technique by Atkeson 
[11] allows the modeling of inertial parameters to occur by measuring the torque of the 
actuators for several known motions. 

There are two methods which are used to produce these dynamic equations of motion, 
the Newton-Euler formulation and the Lagrangian formulation. The Newton- Euler equa- 
tions are founded on the principles of Newton's Second Law of Motion, which describes 
dynamic systems in terms of force and momentum. These equations incorporate all the 
forces and moments acting on each link. In the Lagrangian formulation, the system's 
dynamic behavior is described in terms of work and energy using geireralized coordinates. 
Both methods result in the same dynamic equation. 

To illustrate the complexity of the dynamics of a serial manipulator, the actuator 
torque equation is given below: 

T. = [Au]qi + [A^j]q^ + [Bij]m, + [C^jk]qiqJ + D, + Ei (2.1) 

where 

Ti - the drive torque vector at joint i 

qi - the position of joint i 

[An] - the effective inertia matrix for joint i 

[Aij] - the coupled inertia matrix between joint i and j 

[Bij] - the coefficient matrix of the centripetal forces 

[Cji-j - the coefficient matrix of the Coriolis forces 

Di ' the vector of gravitational forces 

Ei - the vector of externally applied forces at the end effector 

17 

Thus, it is obvious that the robot is a multiple input, multiple output system and can 
be described by i non-linear, coupled differential equations. Note that frictional effects 
were also neglected in the above equation. In the design of control systems for most 
existing commercial robots, the dynamic Equation 2.1 is simplified by neglecting all the 
terms except for the fixed inertia matrix [An] and the gravitational force vector, £>,-. This 
results in the following linear equation: 

T^ = [Au]q^ + A (2.2) 

This equation can be divided into a set of i uncoupled linear equations. With this simpli- 
fication, the set of coefficients in [An] and D,- are considered position independent, thus, 
classical linear control theory can be used to design the servo controllers. Desired dynamic 
behavior can only be obtained in a small region of the robot's work envelope because the 
physical system does not ignore the coefficients which were eliminated from Equation 2.1. 
Presently, virtually all robot controllers are decoupled and have fixed control coefficients. 

Practical experience with robots that utilize these simplified linear controllers point out 
the inadequate behavior of the dynamic responses mainly attributed to neglected terms 
in Equation 2.1. Unstable behavior can occur in extreme conditions, especially when the 
robot is heavily laden and the resonant frequency of the robot approaches that of the 
servomotor bandwidth. The assumption of time or position invariance is too coarse an 
assumption for many applications. 

An example of the varying inertial loads for a typical industrial robot is given below. 
A complete structural dynamic analysis was performed on a Cincinnati Milacron T3-776 
robot, (refer to Stern [8]), and the resulting mass model is shown in Figure 2.1. 

As stated earlier, the linear uncoupled controller which is used to control most robots, 
provides optimal dynamic response for a limited range of the robot's work volume. But as 
will be shown now, the inertial load for the first axis changes in a ratio 12:1 depending on 
the position of the robot's wrist. This does not include the inertial effects of any externally 
applied loads. If ©3 equals 150 degrees, (maximum for joint 3) and ©2 equals 90 degrees, 
then the total inertial load due to the masses of the robot structure depicted in Figure 2.2 

18 

Figure 2.1: Mass Model of the T3-776 Robot (Adapted From [8]) 
can be found with the following equation: 

Itot = Ml */iCOs(^2)-/2COs(^3-^2) + M2*/2COS(e2)+ (2.3) 

Ms + /a cos(6'2) + h cos(6l3 - 62) 

(2.4) 

where 

h - 44 in (1.1 m) 

h = 16 in (0.43 m) 

I3 = 55 in (1.5 m) 

Ml = 1.024 lb sec'^/in (177.7 N sec'^/m) 

M2 = 0.525 lb sec'^/in (91.1 N sec^/m) 

Ads ^ 0.878 lb sec'^/in (152.3 N sec^jm) 

Using the above equation, the total inertia is equal to 729.5 in *lb* se(? (83.2 N *m* 
sec^). This is approximately the minimum inertial load for the base axis. If new values 
are selected for ©2 and 63, a near maximum inertial load can be calculated. Letting 02 
equal 30 degrees and 63 equal 150 degrees, the configuration depicted in Figure 2.3 is 
produced. 

Again using the above equation, the inertial loads is calculated as 8872.6 in * lb * sec? 
(1011 N * m * sec^) for this configuration. Indeed, a 12:1 ratio was found between the 

19 

(mi) 

@ ) 150 

L1 

Figure 2.2: Minimum Inertial Position of Base Axis of T3-776 

Figure 2.3: Maximum Inertial Position of Base Axis of T3-776 

--mm mi i 

20 

Time 

Figure 2.4: Response of Single Degree-of- Freedom Manipulator to Various Damping Ratios 

extreme inertial loads for the base axis, and this ratio could become even greater if, for 
example, there was a large mass being carried by the gripper. 

From this simple exercise, it is obvious that to ignore the position dependant terms in 
the dynamic equations of motion could have undesirable effects on the robot motion. This 
demonstration addresses only the inertial terms and not the cross coupling, centripetal, 
Coriolis, gravitational, or external force coefficients. Depending on the velocity and config- 
uration of the manipulator, these terms could be significant and further limit the dynamic 
capabilities of the robot. 

To illustrate the effects of external torque disturbances in the form of varying inertial 
loads, a simple example will be given using a single degree-of-freedom manipulator. For a 
single degree-of-freedom manipulator, there are obviously no cross coupling terms in the 
dynamic equation of motion; however, the inertial load perceived by the servomotor can 
be changed by attaching various masses to the end of the manipulator. 

With the servo described as a second order system, and a fixed inertial load attached 
to the manipulator, the feedback gains can be adjusted so tlie servomotor is critically 
damped. This provides quick response to a setpoiiit without overshoot, as seen in (a) in 
Figure 2.4. For the same system, but with an increased inertial load, the response of the 
system will be more sluggish and take a greater time to reach the desired output, as seen 

21 

in (b) in Figure 2.4, this also indicates an overdamped system. If the inertia was reduced 
instead, the system would become underdamped resulting in overshoot as seen in (c) in 
Figure 2.4. 

This type of response is sometimes observed on typical industrial robots, especially 
when heavy objects are grasped or the inertial load of a particular joint is affected by 
the position of the end effector. In many industrial applications, robots are expected to 
do this type of procedure constantly when doing pick and place operations. In fact, the 
effects may be more pronounced when the cross coupled velocity related terms are included 
during the high speed operation of the manipulator. 

The dynamic behavior of a robot can be defined as the time rate of change of the robot 
arm in relation to the joint torques exerted by the actuators. To achieve the dynamic 
behavior required of high speed, accurate manipulation tasks, it is intuitive that the 
varying dynamic behavior just depicted may cause errors in the desired motion of the 
robot. But for all linear type robot controllers, variation in the dynamic response of the 
system is typical. Thus, one may conclude that the step response of a linearly controlled 
servo system to various inertial loads are different, and in turn affect the overall dynamic 
response of the robot. To provide a repeatable response even when various loads are 
applied, alternative feedback strategies have to be imposed. 

To understand the dynamic various compensation methods, an introduction to the 
operation of permanent magnet DC motors and Silicon Controlled Rectifier (SCR) con- 
trollers would be useful. In the next section, a brief overview of the operation of typical 
position controlled servo systems will be discussed. 

Introduction to the Operation of a Permanent Magnet DC Motor and SCR Controllers 

There are two basic types of DC motors, those with electromagnetic fields and those 
with permanent magnet fields. Most electric industrial robots like the Cincinnati Milacron 
T3-776 utilize permanent magnet DC servomotors, so this discussion will be limited to 
motors of this type. 

22 

Torque 

Figure 2.5: Torque/Speed Curve for a Typical Permanent Magnet DC Motor 

Since the stater magnetic field of permanent magnet DC motors is generated by per- 
manent magnets, no power is used in the field structure. Because no power is required 
to generate the stator ma,gnetic flux, the efficiency of a permanent magnet DC motor is 
greater than that of electromagnetic field DC motors. Since the conversion of electrical to 
mechanical power takes place in the armature windings, the power supplied to the field 
windings results in mostly heat loss in the winding itself. Thus, permanent magnet motors 
reduce power requirements while also, introducing less heat to the system [13]. 

Because the stator magnetic flux remains essentially constant at all levels of armature 
current, the speed-torque curve of a permanent magnet motor remains constant over an 
extended range, see Figure 2.5. With modern ceramic magnets, the stalled torque will 
tend to be higher and the speed-torque curve will tend to be more linear than for a field 
wound motor. This greatly simplifies the control architecture, as will be seen shortly. 

Another benefit of the permanent magnet DC motor is a reduced frame size for a 
given power output. Because of the high coercive strength of permanent magnets, their 
radial dimension is typically one-forth that of a field wound motor [13]. The benefits of a 

permanent magnet motors over a field wound motors are summarized as follows: 

• Linear torque-speed characteristics 

• High stall torque 

la 

La 

23 

Rl 

6 

Eg 

Figure 2.6: Equivalent Circuit of a Permanent Magnet DC Motor 

• No power loss or heat gains from electromagnetic flux generator 

• Smaller frame and lighter motor for required output 

The description of the motor equations start with the relationship between the elec- 
trical variables. An accurate model of the motor is required to reveal the origin of some 
of these variables. Figure 2.6 provides the equivalent circuit of a permanent magnet DC 
motor. The impedance at stall is equal to a resistance R, in series with a parallel combi- 
nation of L and another resistance Ri. The physical explanation for this model is that Ri 
represents the losses of the armature windings, L is the inductance found in the armature 
windings and R is due to other losses, brushes for example. The resistance of the armature 
windings, Ri is usually larger than R, approximately 10 times larger, thus the effect of Ri 
on the operation of the motor is insignificant and will be neglected from this point. 

As the armature rotates in the stator magnetic field, internally generated electromotive 
forces appear across the armature terminals. The induced force is known to most as the 
counter emf, represented as Eg. The supplied motor voltage and current will be denoted 
as V and /, respectively. The relation between these variables can be represented by the 
following equation: 

F = 4 + «/+£, 

(2.5) 

24 
where Eg, the back emf is proportional to the the motor velocity u. 

Eg = K,io (2.6) 

These equations can be combined to provide the electrical equation of the motor: 

V = L^+Rl+Keu (2.7) 

Because the magnetic field in a permanent magnet motor remains constant, the motor 
current / produces a proportional torque output, T^: 

Tt = Kt * I (2.8) 

The torque constant, Kt-, provided by the motor manufacturer, is used in calculating 
the total torque output of the motor, Tt. The rotating components of the motor have 
a corresponding inertia, J. The torque required to accelerate J will be defined by the 
following equation: 

Tm = J^ (2.9) 

Additional torque loads seen by the motor include a constant friction term T/, viscous 
friction and windage losses, Du), which are proportional to the motor velocity, and any 
additional loads seen by the motor due to external loads, Te. These additional loads will 
be lumped into a single term T/ and their relationships will be expressed as follows: 

Ti^Du + Tj + T, (2.10) 

The relationship between the torques and motor velocity can be seen in the following 

equation: 

^ ^du ^ ^ ^ , s 

Tt=-J— + Dio + Tf + Te (2.11 

at 

or simplified as: 

Tt = Tm + Ti (2.12) 

With equations 2.7, 2.8 and 2.1 the relationship between the electrical and mechanical 
variables are described. With these equations, the transfer function between the motor 

25 

voltage and the corresponding motor velocity can be established. For the initial discus- 
sion, the following variables will be set to zero: Tj — and 1} = 0. Applying Laplace 
transformations, the motor equations can be re-written as: 

V{s) = {Ls + R)I{s) + Keio{s) (2.13) 

Ttis) = KJ{s) (2.14) 

Tt{s) = J,Lj(s) + Duj{s) (2.15) 

The motor current, /, can now be expressed as: 

T(s) = ~iJs + D)Lo(s) (2.16) 

and can be substituted into equation 2.13 to form 

V{s) = ^{Ls + R){Js + D)u{s) + K,u{s) (2.17) 

The corresponding transfer function is 

(2.18) 

V{s) {Ls + R){Js + I?) + KJU 
The above transfer function has two poles, which are the roots of the characteristic equa- 
tion or the denominator. The characteristic equation can be re-written as follows: 

LJs^ + {LD + RJ)s + RD + KJ{t = ^ (2.19) 

By making the valid assumption that the motor damping factor, D is equal to zero 
and that the motor inductance is small, [13] the transfer function can be simplified and be 
written in the following form: 

(^-^)(--f) = (2.20) 

where the poles are equal to the inverse of the respective mechanical r^ and electrical 
time constants re. The transfer function can now be written as: 

w(5) _ II Kt 

V{s) (r„(5)5 + l){Te{s)s + 1) 

(2.21) 

26 

V + 

<S)— 

Ke 

Tl 

1 

1 

Kt 

Tm 

Ls + R 

+ 

Js + D 

Figure 2.7: Block Diagram of a Simplified Permanent Magnet DC Motor 

and the mechanical time constant is written as: 

' m. — 

RJ 
KtKt 

(2.22) 

and the electrical time constant is equal to: 

T. = — 

R 

(2.23) 

Usually the mechanical time constant is approximately ten times greater than that of the 
electrical time constant. The electrical time constant can be ignored in many simulation 
exercises, and the system will still be accurately modeled. 

These above equations help to express the physical properties of an ideal permanent 
magnet DC motor, some simplifications have been made to the model. For further detail, 
see [13]. A block diagram of a simplified DC motor is illustrated in Figure 2.7. 

Note that the motor velocity is the value being controlled here by the input volt- 
age. Most machine tools/robots utilize positional control loops and this subject will be 
discussed later in this section. 

The next major component of a servo system to be discussed is the motor controller. 
Transistor amplifiers used in the speed or torque control of DC servomotors are divided into 
two broad categories; linear amplifiers and switching amplifiers. Typically, linear amplifiers 
are used for fractional horsepower motors and switching amplifiers are used for integral 
horsepower motors, motors having ratings of one horsepower or more. Because most large 

27 

-- 

--. 

— 

•- 

C'l 

^ 

=^L 

^ — 

a, pulss-width modulated (PV/M) system 

b, pulse-frequency modulated (PFM) system 

/ 
/ 
1 

1 

1 

r\ 

/ 

/ 
/ 

1 

1 

1 

; 

1 

-*■ 

Oil 

*- 

-* 

*-. 

— ►- 

♦- 

- 1 — *■ 

c, SCR control system 

Figure 2.8: Voltage Waveforms in Switching Amplifiers (Adapted from [13]) 

industrial robots employ integral horsepower servomotors, the following discussion will be 
limited to switching type amplifiers. 

To create the large currents required by motors of this type, these controllers employ 
Silicon Controlled Rectifiers (SCR) otherwise known as thyristors. Switching amplifiers 
enjoy a distinct advantage over the linear amplifiers in that they more efficient for large 
current applications. Three basic methods are used to control the power in switching 
amplifiers; Pulsed Width Modulation (PWM), Pulsed Frequency Modulation (PFM), and 
SCR controls. Their principal differences are shown in Figure 2.8 

The PWM system is described as utilizing a DC power supply, and the amplifier 
switches the supply voltage on and ofi" at a fixed frequency, with a variable firing angle 
so that the desired voltage across the load is established. The firing angle is actually 

T*<^ 

Pre- 
Ampiifiar 

DC/Pulse 
Converter 

Feed 
Back 

7-<» 

AC 

3 Phass 

vuu 

SCR 
Driver 

28 

Motor 

Figure 2.9: Overview of SCR Controller Operation 

related to the duration that current is flowing through the SCR. The amount of power 
transferred to the motor will depend on the switching rate and the load inductance. The 
pulse frequency is usually fixed at a high frequency, around 1000 Hz. 

The PFM has a fixed firing angle but a variable firing rate. It achieves the same results 
as the PWM, but it is somewhat harder to implement. 

The SCR circuit for DC motor control usually operates from an AC power source. 
SCRs are different than typical transistor switching devices in that they can switch much 
higher currents, but once activated, the SCR passes current until the input AC voltage 
drops back to zero. SCR speed controls are nearly always based on the power line fre- 
quency of 60 Hz. This somewhat limits the controller bandwidth. However, like the PWM 
controller, the SCR circuit incorporates a high frequency (1 - 10 Khz) clock, which allows 
the SCR to be switched on with precision. 

While the SCR controller is limited in bandwidth, it has a high power conversion 
efficiency due to its switching mode. The relative simplicity of its circuitry adds to the 
positive features of the SCR controller. The popularity of the SCR control for DC motor 
control in the integral horse power range has been due to the above mentioned features. 
In addition, SCR can operate directly from the power line without AC-to-DC power 
conversion. 

Figure 2.9 provides an overview of the velocity control of a servomotor and the opera- 

29 

-Amplifier switched on 
I 
-Torque disturbance 

Figure 2.10: Result of a Sudden Torque Disturbance on a SCR Speed Control System 
(Adapted from [13]) 

tion of the SCR circuit. A pre-amp takes the output of the comparator, properly adjusts 
the value and then provides an input to the SCR circuit. A circuit in the SCR controller, 
denoted SCR Controller, then sends a command voltage to the SCR at the appropriate 
time to provide the necessary polarity and duration of the AC sine-wave. Not only does 
this circuit allow the direction of the motor to be controlled, it also provides dynamic 
braking. 

An important problem in SCR velocity control systems is the 'transportation' lag or 
dead time. This is caused by the discrete firing angle conduction and the fact that once 
the SCR is activated, its output cannot turn off until the forward current goes to zero. For 
example, if the motor was in steady state with a constant velocity and suddenly torque 
disturbance was applied, the resulting change in speed could cause the SCR to fire 'early'. 
The results are simulated in Figure 2.10. Note that this controller does not have the 
capability of dynamic braking, it cannot apply a negative current to the motor. 

The result will be a heavy surge of power for the remaining part of the half cycle, even 
if the error signal has returned to normal in the meantime. The motor now has a large 
over speed error, and will coast down to the predetermined control speed. This results in 
a somewhat jerky motion of the motor. Many of the larger controllers use a 3 phase AC 

Tl 

30 

' »v 

>N 

Ka Kscr 

+ 

Kt 

»./V^ *■ 

1 

Kp 

k. 

1+Ts 

A- 

Ls+R 

^{^ *• 

Js 

1 

' 

T 

"". ^ 

V 

^ 

Ke 

, < 

1 

I - 

Kv 

i 

Pa 

Output 

1 

Rs 

Figure 2.11: Block Diagram of a Position Controlled Servo 

voltage source, this in combination with the dynamic braking capability greatly improves 
the responsiveness of the SCR controller and helps to reduce the jerky motion illustrated 
in Figure 2.10. 

With the above information, an accurate model of the base axis servo system of the 
T3-776 robot can now be developed. This model will incorporate a Proportional Integral 
Derivative (PID) controller as found on the base axis of the T3-776, with positional and 
velocity feedback. A block diagram representation is seen in Figure 2.11. Points of interest 
include the PID amplifier, the SCR driver, and the motor. The constants for the block 
diagram are defined below: 

Kp - positional feedback gain L - motor inductance 

Ka ' proportional velocity gain R - motor resistance 

T - integration time constant Kt - torque constant of motor 

Kscr - thyristor amplifier gain J - motor inertia 

Ke - internal motor feedback 
Ky - tachometer constant 

r - mechanical reduction of drive 
Tl - external load torque 

The closed positional loop transfer function of the above system can be written as 
[KpKJ{scRKtP{s) + (1 + Ts)iLs + R)Ti{s) 

9{3) = 

{A)s^ + (5)53 + {C)s^ + {D)s + (E) 

(2.24) 

where 

31 

A = {LTJr) 

B = {TR + L){Jr) 

C = (RJr + K.KtTr) 

D = {KeKtr + KaKscRKtKyr) 

E - {KpKaKsCRlQ) 

The block diagram in Figure 2.11 was used as the developmental base for a simulation 
model of the actual servo controller used in these experiments. The controller will be 
discussed in further detail in the following section, which is devoted to modeling techniques 
for the servo controller and the base axis dynamics. 

Development of the Base Axis Servo Driver and Motor Model 

This section is devoted to the development of a model of the base axis servomotor and 
motor driver of the T3-776 robot. Included are modeling methods and simulated results of 
the model. These models are necessary to better understand the operation of the base axis 
of the robot. Additionally, through accurate simulation, various dynamic compensation 
schemes could be tested and evaluated before being actually implemented on the base axis 
controller. 

A robot servo system can be broken into two major components, the servo controller 
or driver, and the servomotor. A servomotor can be quickly and easily modeled and accu- 
rate simulations performed if the motor characteristics supplied by the manufacturer are 
correct. In fact, most of the motor characteristics can be easily measured if the necessary 
testing equipment is available. Electro-craft [13] details methods to obtain all required 
motor constants. The following constants were provided by the motor manufacturer for 
the base axis motor of the T3-776, and assumed accurate: 

R - 0.63 ohm (includes both armature and additional resistances) 
L - 3.53 mH (includes both motor and choke) 

32 

• ^*(< 

P— 

Kp 

!'\V 

>\ 

- 

Pre- 
Amp 

<'^' ISCR 
TOriver 

(3) 

>■ 

Motor 

I *Q 

1 »-{?y 
\ (4) 

Tach 

I Digital 

Controller 

Figure 2.12: Simplified Block Diagram of T3-776 Base Servo Loop 

Jm. - 0.0073 ft * lb * sec'^/rad (0.01 N * m * sec^/rad), including armature, tachometer, 
brake and pulley inertia 

Kt - 0.51 Nm/A 

Ke - 0.51 V/rad/sec 

Ky - 0.18 V/rad/sec (tachometer output) 

These values were used for the system simulation program. 

Because of the limited information supplied by the servo controller's manufacturer, 
the controller had to be accurately measured and through an iterative process using sim- 
ulation, the motor constants were discovered and verified. The servo controller is a PID 
type controller manufactured by Siemens Incorporated. The PID circuit incorporates a 
switched gain amplifier, where both the integral and proportional gains are switched from 
one value to another when the motor velocity goes above or below 100 RPM. The PID 
pre-amplifier circuit drives the motor amplifier, which has a rated output of 44 amps at 
150 volts [14]. 

A simplified block diagram of the servo loop is seen in Figure 2.12. Four nodes of 
the actual system were monitored and the signals were recorded in real time with a data 
acquisition system. These test points are labeled (1) through (4) in Figure 2.12. By 
applying various inputs at node (1), the response of the system could be analyzed and the 
system parameters could be estimated. With the estimated system parameters, the servo 
control loop could be accurately simulated. 

33 

The first experiment performed on the servo system was one to determine the band- 
width of the base aods servo system. Sine waves of various frequencies were introduced 
to the input of the velocity loop, denoted as node (1) in Figure 2.12. The tachometer, 
which provides the velocity feedback is located at the motor and the positional resolver 
for the base axis is located at the crown gear. By disconnecting the timing belt between 
the motor and the gearbox, the positional loop is opened, while the velocity loop remains 
closed. The record of the tachometer output (node 4), showed that the velocity response 
of the system dropped off 20 db per decade at 11 Hz. 

It is interesting to note that the first natural frequency of the robot in a somewhat 
extended configuration is approximately 10 Hz. In some extreme instances, the robot 
would become unstable when fully extended and an external load applied. This event 
might be explained because the first natural frequency of the robot falls within the velocity 
bandwidth of the base servomotor. Most robot manufacturers circumvent this problem by 
requiring the bandwidth of the servo to be lower than the first natural frequency of the 
robot. 

To determine the gains of the system, a step input was introduced to the input of the 
velocity loop, denoted point (1) in Figure 2.12 and again, the signals from the four nodes 
of interest were recorded real time. Voltage dividers had to implemented for the SCR and 
tachometer outputs, nodes (3) and (4), to prevent saturation of the GenRad data logger 
used to record the tests. See Appendix B for a complete description of equipment used. 

The gains in the PID controller are difficult to measure directly because the velocity 
feedback term is summed with the commanded input voltage. If the controller could be 
operated in an open velocity loop configuration, the proportional and feedback gains could 
be determined directly. However, when the velocity feedback signal is disconnected and 
that input shorted to ground, the system will quickly become unstable and automatically 
shutdown. If the values of the various potentiometers in the circuit could be directly 
measured, the gains could be estimated by equations derived from the schematic. However, 
this would require that the potentiometers to be removed from the circuit board. 

34 

Rf 

U 

12 

\XS>s^ 

Figure 2.13: Schematic of Simple Summing Amplifier 

A method was developed so that the proportional input and feedback gains could be 
estimated. Assuming that the gains of the input summing amplifier are fixed, relationships 
between known inputs and measured outputs of the amplifier could be used to calculate 
the input gains. For the simple amplifier depicted in Figure 2.13 the gains for the inputs, 
Gi are equal to the ratio of the feedback resistance, Rj over the input resistance R^. By 
changing one of the input voltages, the difference in the output is used to calculate the 
gains. For example, the input voltage, /i was doubled, and the result is expressed as 
follows: 

Oi = /iGi+/2G'2 
O2 = HGi + I2G2 
h = 2/3 

(2.25) 
(2.26) 
(2.27) 

Making the proper substitution and simplification, the gain for input one, Gi is equal to: 

O1-O2 

Gi 

(2.28) 

and then, G2 can be easily solved for also. Because the difference between 0\ and O2 is 

35 

Input 

10K 

A/V- 

.22uF: 

Feedback 
22K 

— AA/- 

77/77 

.22uF: 

77777 

77777 
56K 

-AAr- 

2.2K+2K(x) 

^=^ 

220+2K(1-x) ^'^"^"^ ^220+2K{1-y) lOOK 

rVVi 

220+2K{y) 

j67K 

1 77f77 

hooK 

-Vv 

100K 

Output 

Proportional Section 

Integral Section 

Figure 2.14: Simplified Schematic of the Siemens Amplifier Circuit 

small, these gains could only be considered approximate. The input gain, G\ vvas equal 
to 9.16 and the feedback gain G'2 was equal to -1.16. 

A simplified schematic of the Siemens PID amplifier is presented in Figure 2.14 and 
shows the proportional summing amplifier along with the parallel integrating circuit. The 
outputs of these two circuits are combined using an additional unity gain amplifier. The 
output of this unity gain amplifier is noted with the label (2) in Figure 2.12. Items 
of interest in this circuit include the switching circuit which effects a change in both 
the proportional and the integration gain of the circuit when a certain velocity feedback 
potential is reached. 

Because the values for a.dditional potentiometers in the circuit are unknown, the gain 
for the integrator and its time constant have to be approximated and then verified through 
simulation. The PID controller also includes a low pass filter at the input for both the 
input and feedback connections which have to be modeled and included in the simulation. 
This changed the PI portion of the amplifier from a first order system to a second order 

36 

system and the change was included in the simulation. This amplifier has a bounded 

output of -12 to +12 volts. 

To improve the response of a SCR driven servomotor, a small alternating current is 
constantly sent to the motor, even when no motion is required of the motor. The average 
current applied to the motor is equal to zero. The current pulses are small enough that 
the armature does not rotate but large enough that the negative effect of the motor 
inductance is reduced. If the motor is requested to turn in a certain direction, the PID 
amplifier provides the appropriate voltage to the SCR circuitry, and the current pulses 
increase in the required direction and simultaneously, the current pulses of the opposite 
sign decrease. This results in an increased average current in the desired direction, causing 
torque to be produced and acceleration of the motor in the proper direction. 

A simulation program was developed to emulate a 3-phase SCR switching circuit. 
Initially, the simulated output did not correctly correspond with the actual system. It 
became apparent that an additional integrator is used in the SCR driver circuit. With the 
additional integrator included, an excellent simulation of the closed velocity loop of the 
servo system is produced. A copy of this simulation program can be found in Appendix C. 
Figure 3.12 shows the measured outputs of the nodes labeled (1) through (4) in Figure 2.12, 
where the points are identified as follows: 

(1) - input step command in velocity 

(2) - output of PID amplifier 

(3) - output of SCR circuit 

(4) - tachometer output 

Figure 2.16 shows the simulated response of the closed velocity loop with a step in- 
put. The simulated response closely resembles the actual system and a block diagram 
representation of the simulated servo system which produced this output can be seen in 
Figure 2.17. The simulation includes non-linearities encountered in the actual system 
such as voltage limits, current limits, discreet time control for the firing of the SCRs, etc. 
The model of the base axis velocity loop developed in the simulation could then be used 

37 

INPUT 

2.309 

RT IMPUT LIN 
CH 1 
1X+ • 
VOLTS . 

-z.eso 

IS. SO I 

_J I , 

1 . < • 

■ I 1 1 

■ 

- 

_ 

- 

„• 

- 

- 

. 

- 

~ 

I 

[ 1 1 — 1 1 

LI. -I 

TIMFCSEC) 

RT INPUT LIlS- . 

CM 2 

2X+ 

VOLTS 

0.2303 : 

RT INPUT LIN 

CH 4 

AX+ 

VOLTS 

-13. ea 

TIMECSEC) 

0.2000 

Figure 2.15: Actual Response of Base Axis to a Step Input in Velocity 

o 
o 

CD 
D 

CJo~, 

o 

38 

— 

o 

\ 

tJ 

(=; : 

I 

o 

\ 

I 

._J.- 

o 

O .A 

i\ 

A 11 

C.03 

0.05 o'.07 ' 0.10 oTl2 0.15 

Figure 2.16: The Simulated Response of the Base Axis Servo to a Step Input In Velocity 

39 

P(s) 

-t®-* ^' -r<S^— ^ 

KaKscr 
1 + Ts 

F»sd 
Back 

Kt 
Ls + R 

-<gh 

Js 

Ka 

Rs 

Pa 

Figure 2.17: Block Diagram Representation of Base Axis Servo 

to accurately determine the response of the base axis to various dynamic compensation 
schemes. 

To complete the simulation of the base servo, the positional gain constant, Kp has 
to be obtained. It was unavailable from the manufacturer of the robot and could not 
be directly measured because it was contained in the digital portion of the controller. A 
scheme was developed to iteratively obtain the value through additional measurements 
and simulations. 

The positional loop was closed by re-attaching the toothed belt from the motor to the 
gear box. A step input of one volt, V^ was applied to the input of the velocity loop and 
the motor velocity, lj^ was measured by monitoring the tachometer. Figure 2.18 shows 
the velocity response of the base axis to the step input. Because the step input is not 
commanded by the controUer, it is perceived by the system as a positional error and is 
eliminated over time. Several simulation runs were required before an accurate match 
could be made between the actual and simulated response of the servo to step inputs in 
position. The iterated value for Kp from simulation is eciual to approximately 70. 

After completing the model of the motor and controller, an accurate model of the 
robot structure was needed in the simulation. The next section explains the structural 
modeling techniques and results. 

40 

D/fl OUT 

1.0QO - 

RT INPUT LIN -■ 

CH 2 , 

1X+ 

VOLTS 

-1.000 

1 1 ' r 

1.000 

TRCH OUT 

4.000 

RT INPUT LIN 

CH 3 

3X+ 

VOLTS 

-4.000 

1.000 
TinECSEC): 0.0 

i 1 I I I I 1 1 1 

1 r- 

LIN 

_1 I L_ 

-T 1 1 ^ 1 1 <- 

TINECSEC) 

3 . 9U0 

T r 1 r 1 1 1 1 r- 

LIN TIMECSEC) 
RMPL: 0.02346 

-r 1 1 — r 

3.000 

Figure 2.18: Velocity Response of the Base Axis to a Positional Error Step Input 
Development of the Structural Dynamic Model of the Base Axis 

This section is devoted to devolving a dynamic structural model of the base axis of the 
robot. To achieve an accurate dynamic simulation of the controller in the closed positional 
loop, additional information regarding the robot's structural dynamic response must be 
known. This response was obtaiiTod by developing a spring/mass model of the servomotor 
drive system including the belts, gearboxes and robot structure. Figure 2.19 shows a 
simplified diagram of the base axis drive. 

The motor pulley has a diameter of 4 inches, the gear box pulley has a diameter of 
7.75 inches and is driven by a toothed, timing belt. The gearbox has a reduction ratio 
of 13.5:1. The pinion gear is 3.25 inches in diameter and it drives the crown gear, 20 
inches in diameter. OveraU, there is a reduction of 160:1 (motor revolutions to crown gear 
revolutions). 

Measurements were made with the robot in an extended configuration, as seen in 
Figure 2.20. Accelerometers were placed on the robot structure at the points labeled 1, 2, 

41 

Pinion Gear 

Gear Case 

Pinion Gear Motor 

Figure 2.19: Base Axis Drive 

Figure 2.20: Robot In Extended Configuration (Adapted from [8]) 

42 

Drive Mechanism 

XO 

-> Displacement 
of Motor 

Ra 

Rb 

X'O 

Ka 

Ca 

Robot Link 
Srtucture 

Displacement | Displacement 

X1 of Base ' X2 of End-Effector 

Kb 

Ma 

Mass of 

Base 

Mb 

Mass of 

Arm 

Cb 

Figure 2.21: Linear Spring/Mass/Dashpot Representation of Base Axis 

3 and also on the extreme radius of the base, 4, the gearbox pulley and the motor pulley. 
At point 1, the robot was struck with a modally tuned hammer. 

To excite the various modes of vibration, the amplitude of the impact must be sufficient 
to excite these natural frequencies of the robot. To facilitate this requirement, a large mass 
(5 Kg) was attached to the hammer, and a soft striking tip was used. This setup provided 
the necessary excitation force. The accelerometers, located at the points mentioned above 
measure the absolute vibrational response of the structure at these points. Taking the 
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) of the accelerometers' response and dividing by the FFT 
of the input (hammer), a transfer function is made at each accelerometer location. This 
is done automatically with GenRad. To reduce noise and other extraneous influences, an 
average of five samples was taken. 

The torsional flexibilities of the base axis are pictorially represented in Figure 2.21. To 
simplify the system. Figure 2.21 shows a linear representation of an actual rotating system. 
The motor output, Xo drives the inertial mass of the base, ma, through a combination of 
a spring and dashpot. It is interesting to note that the positional feed-back for this axis is 

43 

taken at Xi, or off a pinion gear driven by the crown gear of the base. The base inertia, 
which is a constant, drives through a second spring and dashpot combination, a second 
inertial load m;,. The variable mass, mf, represents the upper structure of the robot and is 
dependent on the configuration of the manipulator and any external payload the robot is 
carrying. As mentioned previously, the inertial load, rrib for the base axis may change in 
a ratio of 12:1 depending on the robot configuration and as a result, affects the dynamic 
response of the robot. 

The linear representation of the base axis seen in Figure 2.21 includes the gear ratio of 
the base axis, n, represented linearly by the ratio of the link lengths Ta/rb- The differential 
equations for the spring/mass/dashpot system depicted in Figure 2.21 are written as 
follows: 

= maxi + Ca(i-i - i'o) + cb{xi - i2) + K{xi - x'q) + kb{xi - X2) (2.29) 
= mbX2 + Cb{i:2 - xi) -V h{x2 - xi) (2.30) 

The variables ig and x'q in the above equation can be replaced as follows: 

= mai'i + cJxi - -xq) + Cb[xi - ±2) + ka{xi - -xo) + hixi - X2) (2.31) 

n "■ 

where xq and xo are the motor velocity and position, respectively. These equations are 
easily implemented into a simulation program, after the values for the springs, masses and 
dashpots are obtained. A linear representation for the spring/mass system is provided in 
Figure 2.21. It should be noted that for the actual base axis, the positional feedback is 
taken from the point labeled .1:1. The errors caused by fca, Ca and m^ can be eliminated 
over time because they are contained within the closed positional loop. The errors caused 
by the second spring/mass/dashpot system denoted fc^, m^, and Cfc are external to the 
positional control loop and are not eliminated without external compensation. 

To provide values for m^, rnj,, c^, Cft, ka. and kb several transfer functions were made. 
The direct transfer function taken at the wrist (point 1 in Figure 2.20) produced two 
prominent natural frequencies of 9.64 Hz and 13.93 Hz. The six transfer functions taken 

44 

at the points described above indicated that for the lowest frequency, all of the transfer 

functions were in phase, thus describing the first mode of vibration. However, the phase 

for the second mode changed between the transfer functions taken at point (3) and (4), 

indicating two separate masses, one located at the base and the other at some point above 

the base. Using practical experience as a guide, the damping ratios for those natural 

frequencies were estimated to be Ci = 0.05 and (2 = 0.08, respectively. By measuring the 

magnitude of the imaginary part of the direct transfer function, the modal spring rates 

were estimated with the following equation: 

/,.'. _ i.'^^'^ni) /.2_3.2) 

''' - 2Q\Im[G].^J 

where ' 

Uni - the I*'* natural frequency 

Q - the i^^ damping ratio 

ImfG'l- - the magnitude of the imaginary part of the i*'' natural frequency 

The modal spring constants were calculated for the two natural frequencies as R'l = 4.42 + 
10^ lb/in (7.67 * lO'^ N/m) and A'2 = 3.46 * IQ-* lb/in (6.00 * lO^N/m). With the spring 
constants known, the masses can be calculated using the following equation: 

m, = -^ (2.33) 

The masses for the given orientation of the robot equaled 1.21 and 4.52 Ih^sec^/m (210 and 
784 N*5ec2/m) respectively. The masses and stiffness values calculated have modal coor- 
dinates and need to be transformed to local coordinates to provide useful useful modelinf 

information. 

Modal coordinates are those which produce diagonal mass [M], stiffness [K], and damp- 
ing [C] matrices. In most systems, the location of the modal coordinates are unknown, so 
they must be transformed to a known set of local coordinates. This is done by producing 
a transformation matrix [P], which is comprised of n eigenvectors representing the n nodes 
of vibration. These eigenvectors are the nontrivial solution of the following equation: 

[K]x^ul[M]x i=l,2, ,n (2.34) 

45 

and correspond to each mode of vibration. Each of these vectors pi has a unique shape 
and is called a modal vector or mode shape. Because the amplitude of the mode shape 
is arbitrary, it is customary to normalize each modal vector with respect to a specific 
reference coordinate. Assembling the n normalized modal vectors into a square matrix, 
with each column corresponding to a single mode of vibration, results in the formulation 
of the modal matrix [P] [8]), where 

[P] = bi,P2,...,Pn] (2-35) 

Because only two dominate modes of vibration were recorded at the wrist, the system 
was modeled as a two degree-of-freedom system. The transfer functions lead to an initial 
conclusion that the first of the system's two masses was located at the base, and the 
second mass was located at the wrist. The diagonal modal matrices, [M]g and [K]q are 
known; however, the transformation matrix, [P] is needed. The matrix [P] can be directly 
produced by taking the ratio of the respective peaks of the imaginary parts of the transfer 
function at the appropriate frequencies. At 9.64 and 13.93 Hz, the amplitude of the 
imaginary peaks were measured for both the direct transfer function at the wrist and the 
cross transfer function at the base as follows: 

Amplitude Of Imaginary Peaks 
9.64 Hz 13.93 Hz 

DTP at Wrist 0.79 8.53 

CTF at Base 0.14 -1.55 

The ratios were normalized to the wrist and the [P] matrix is equal to: 

[^^1 = 

0.0946 -0.089 
1 1 

(2.36) 

The value 0.0946 is equal to 0.79 divided by 8.53 and similarly -0.89 is equal to 0.14 
divided by -1.55. Thus, to get the local values, standard transformation techniques are 
used to transform the modal mass and stiffness matrices into local coordinates using the 
following equations must: 

[Mh = [Pr^'iMUP]-' (2.37) 

46 

and 

[A'jx = [p]-^mjp] 

-1 

so [P]"^ and [P]~'^ must be solved for: 

and 

Solving for [K]x-, the result is: 
1 "^ 

1 

0.1836 

1 

0.1836 

1 0.089 
-1 0.0946 

1 -1 

0.089 0.0946 

[Kh = 

0.1836^ 

1 -1 

0.089 0.0946 

4.42 
34.6 

J L 

or 

m. - 

0.1836^ 

39.02 -2.88 
-2.88 0.345 

1 0.089 
-1 0.0946 

+ 10' 

*10'' 

(2.38) 

(2.39) 

(2.40) 

(2.41) 

(2.42) 

But this does not correspond correctly to the local spring model which should have 
the following form: 

[Alx = 

li'a + Kb 

-Kb 

-Kb 
Kb 

(2.43) 

Therefore, the location of the masses must be different. The mass mi was kept on 

the outer radius of the base, and the location of the second mass, m2 was moved from 

the wrist. In changing the model, it is important that the the transfer function at the 

base remains constant because it contains the two modes of interest and their respective 

damping ratios. The stiffness can be calculated again using Equation 2.32. The pertinent 

information for the first two modes of vibration at the base is presented below: 

ujni^ 9.64Hz Ci = 0.05 fci = 4.42* lO^i^ rm = 120.4^^ 
w„2 = 14.0ifs (2 = 0.08 fc2 = 3.46* 10^1 m2 = 447.2^^ 

After normalizing the transformation matrix to the base, the local mass and stiffness 
matrix can be re-written as: 

and 

[M], = [PflAdUP] 

[K], = [Pf[KUP] 

(2.44) 

(2.45) 

47 

The matrices [P] and [P]^ are defined as follows: 

[P] = 

anc 

[PV = 

1 

1 

p 

r 

1 

P 

1 

r 

(2.46) 

(2.47) 

Equations 2.44 and 2.45 are the inverse of Equations 2.37 and 2.38 respectively. As- 
suming [M]:r is diagonal (remember that [K]g and [M], are known to be diagonal) and 
[K]x is in the matrix form described in Equation 2.43, Equations 2.44 and 2.45 can be 
expanded to provide the following six equations: 

(2.48) 
(2.49) 
(2.50) 
(2.51) 
(2.52) 
(2.53) 

The following six unknowns are produced: m^, rrib, ka, h, p and r. Using the last three 
equations, p can be expressed in terms of mi, m^ and r, resulting in: 

= 

prkb - {p + r)kt, + ka + kb 

ki 

= 

p^kb - 2pkb + ka + kb 

k2 

= 

r'^kb-2rkb + ka + kb 

= 

TTia + prrrib 

mi 

= 

TUa +p'^mb 

7112 

= 

ma + r^rrib 

- — y 

1712 

(2.54) 

Taking equation 2.49, ka can be solved for in terms of p, r and /c^: 

ka = kb{p+r -pr - 1) 

(2.55) 

Dividing Equation 2.50 by 2.51 and substituting for ka in the resulting equation, an 
expression for r in terms of fci, ^2, m-i and m2 is produced. The value r is solved for as: 

ki + k2 

r — 

ki - k2{mi/m2) 

= -7.830 

(2.56) 

48 
and then the value of p can be found with the following equation: 

p--^r = 2.130 (2.57) 

The value for k^ can be solved for by taking Equation 2.50 and substituting for ka in terms 

of fci, p and r: 

kk = -, ^ = 39,272- = 6.81 * 10^- (2.58) 

p^ + r — p — pr in m 

and now solving for ka using Equation 2.55: 

ka = kb(p + r - pr - 1) - 391,810— = 6.79 10^- (2.59) 

ZTl III 

Similarly, rria can be solved for in terms of m;,, p and r using Equation 2.52: 

rua = —p * r * mb (2.60) 

Substituting this expression into Equation 2.53, m;, can be directly solved for: 

rrib = -^ = 5.727 : = 993.6 (2.61) 

^— = 5.727— 
p^ — p * r in m 

Knowing m^, 771^ can be solved for using Equation 2.60 and the result is m^ = 95.52/6 * 
sec'^/in (1.66* IC^iV *5ec^/m). Substituting these calculated values back into the original 
six equations, an error check was successfully made. This transformation now places the 
first local mass, nia on the base radius and the first local spring, ka is located between 
the servomotor and the base. In a similar fashion, the second local spring, kb is located 
between the ma and the second local mass mf,. The location of mb is not exactly known, 
but it should be obvious that it is located somewhere between the base and the wrist of 

the robot. 

The calculated values for ka, kb, ma and mb are listed in the table below. 

ka = 3.918 * 10^/6/m 6.97 * WN/m 

kb = 3.927 + W^lb/in 6.99 * lO^iV/m 

ma = 95.52/6 * sec'^/in 1.675 * W^Kg 

mb = 5.73/6 + sec^jin 1.005 + lO^A'^ 

The ratios between the stiffness of the base transmission {ka) and tlie arm {kb) is approx- 
imately 10:1. This appears to be reasonable when comparing the appropriate transfer 

P(s) 

Internal 
Flexibilities 

External 
Flexibilities 

Pa 

Kp 

V 

K Velocity 
Loop 

— ^ 

1 
Rs 

Cs + K 

Ms2 + Cs + K 

Cs + K 

Ms2 + Cs + K 

49 

Figure 2.22: Positional Block Diagram Including Flexibilities 

functions. However, all the calculated stiffness and mass values appear to be too large 
when compared to the values found by Stern and Tlusty [15]. The mass of the base has 
the highest correspondence between the two measurement experiments, so this value was 
used to scale the measurements made by this author. The mass of the base, mt, is approxi- 
mately seven times larger than the corresponding mass found by Stern. Thus scaling down 
the masses and the stiffness values to one seventh of their original values, the resulting 
stiffness of the arm is approximately equal to 5600 lb/inch, (which is approximately equal 
to the static deflection of the T3-776 robot found by Sklar [9]). This value is much more 
reasonable when compared to the original value of 39,200 lb/inch. The primed values 

listed in the table below are the corrected values. 

k'^ = 5.597 + lOHb/in 9.957 * lO^N/m 

k'^ = 5.610 * lO^lb/in 9.987 * lO^N/m 

m^ = 13.64/5 * sec'^/in 2.385 * 10^ A'^ 

m't = 0.818/6 + secy in 1.430 * IQ'^Kg 

With values for local masses and stiffness values available, the simulation program for 

the base axis was expanded to include ka and rUa in the positional control loop and kb and 

rrib outside of the positional control loop. Figure 2.22 provides a simplified block diagram 

of the positional control loop including the measured flexibilities. Again, it is difficult to 

verify this simulation, because no accurate, real time, displacement measurement device 

with the required range and resolution was available. However, the acceleration of the 

masses ma and mj, could have been recorded real time and compared to the accelerations 

of those masses obtained in the simulation. The location of ma is accurately known so 

the acceleration of that point could be accurately monitored. Because the location of rub 

50 

is not exactly known, the acceleration of that point would not be accurately measured. 

The value rua corresponds to the time invariant inertial term that does not effect the 
dynamic response of the base axis. However, the m^ represents the time varying term that 
does effect the dynamic response of the base axis. The next section will present several 
compensation schemes that would compensate for the time varying inertia described above. 

Several Dynamic Compensation Schemes 

To compensate for the non-linearities due to the ever changing configurations and loads, 
and for the dynamic coupling between the joint motions, several compensation methods 
have been devised by various researchers. They include feedforward compensation schemes 
with both on and off-line calculations of the torque equation coefficients, adaptive control 
utilizing state variable feed back and finally direct torque compensation schemes. Some of 
these methods allow any desired behavior of the end effector by choosing the appropriate 
coefficients for the controlling equations. 

Figure 2.23 illustrates feedforward compensation of a simple position controlled servo- 
motor. The variable qo is the desired input, qj. is the actual velocity output, and q is the 
actual position output. The various parameters which influence the dynamic behavior of 

the system are listed below: 

1. Ci - gravity influence coefficients 

2. Tst - Coloumb friction coefficients 

Z. Fyj - viscous damping influence coefficients 

4. Kv - rate feedback damping coefficients 

5. An - time varying inertial loads 

The influence of gravity and coloumb friction affects the steady state behavior of the 
system. Viscous damping and rate feedback damping affects the tracking error of the 
robot, and the influence of the time varying inertia affects the the dynamic behavior of 
the robot. Each of these influences can be separately modeled and compensated for in a 
straightforward manner. However, in many cases, it may be difficult to accurately predict 
particular influence coefficients in real time. 

51 

qo 

+ 

WX) — *• 

Kp 

-i>(g)— *. Km 

Kv 

(4). 

'+ 

+ 

-•nXK- 

(3) 

Fw -*<5^ 
+ Y 

(2) 

Tst 

+ 

Km 

— ♦► 
+ * 

(1) 

Ci 

(5) 

^ Aii 

+ 

-Kg) 

Js+F 

qd 

Kv ♦ 

1/s 

Figure 2.23: Feedforward Compensation for Parameters Variation 

52 

Since it is difficult to calculate the position dependent parameters for the torque in 
Equation 2.1 in real time, they might be calculated in advance, tabulated and stored for all 
possible configurations. This strategy was impractical at that time (1978) because of the 
huge amount of data required to be calculated and stored. In 1978, Raibert [16] suggested 
that the work volume of the robot be divided into discrete zones, where the required 
coefficients would be calculated, stored and assumed constant for a particular zone. These 
coefficients could then be used to provide the appropriate servo gains for each zone. This 
methodology was later improved by smoothing the coefficients between adjacent zones 
with curve fitting routines, so the transition between zones was not apparent. But this 
method is only possible when the task is completely known, including both the robot's 
path and any additional loads applied to the robot [16]. 

This above task could be further simplified by partitioning the motions of the robot 
into two or more groups. For example, the motions of a typical articulated six degree- 
of- freedom robot could be divided into two groups, those of the structure (the first three 
degrees-of- freedom) and those of the wrist. If the work volume of the robot were parti- 
tioned into n^ nodes related to the position of the wrist, and the orientation of the wrist 
was divided into n^ nodes also, a total of 2 x n'^ nodes would have to be calculated. On 
the other hand, if the equations were not partitioned, then a total of n^ nodes would 
be required for the same resolution. Thus, partitioning the dynamic equations of motion 
greatly reduces the required memory of the computer, in this case by n^ /2, for the six 
degree-of- freedom robot. 

Luh, Walker and Paul [17] developed an elegant recursive algorithm to calculate the 
required joint torques, using Newton-Euler dynamic equations. First, the velocities and 
accelerations are computed recursively from the base to the tip of the robot, that is, the 
velocity and acceleration of each link is based in part on the velocity and acceleration of 
the previous link. Then the required joint forces (for prismatic joints) and torques (for 
revolute joints) are produced, again recursively, but now starting with the last link (the 
link furthest from the base) and ending with the base link. 

53 

This algorithm is one of the fastest existing algorithms for dynamic computation. The 
number of multiplications required to solve this recursive equation is 852 for a general 
six degree-of-freedom manipulator. It takes approximately 4.5 milliseconds on average to 
compute the six joint torques on a PDP 11/45 minicomputer using floating point assembly 
language [18]. 

Another approach to provide the torque information involves the simplification of the 
the torque equation based upon an analysis of the terms. The most common initial 
proposal is the elimination of the coefficient matrix for the centripetal and the Coriolis 
forces with the assumption that these terms are not significant except at high speeds 
[19], [20]. Specifically for the Stanford Arm, Paul [20] states that the actuator inertias 
completely dominate the velocity interaction terms. For different high speed robots, these 
terms which were previously eliminated may become significant. 

Paul [21] introduced another simplification scheme where the coupled inertia matrix 
[Aij], was eliminated leaving just the diagonal effective inertia matrix [Ai] for joint i active. 
Improving this technique, Paul [20] introduces an inertia matrix with just limited cross 
coupling terms. 

Note that for these and other potentially good dynamic computation methods, the 
constants required to produce the various coefficients (for example, the link mass, length 
and location of the center of mass) must be accurately known. In many instances, the 
manufacturer of particular manipulators are unable to provide these values. One method 
of obtaining the necessary parameters would require that the robot be disassembled to 
obtain the needed values. In fact, this is precisely what occurred at Stanford. A PUMA 
560 arm was disassembled and measurements were made to determine the mass, mass 
centroid and rotational inertia of the links [12]. 

A new method has been developed by Atkeson [11], where the inertial parameters of 
manipulator rigid body loads and links are automatically estimated as a result of general 
robot motions. This method involves reformulating the Newton-Euler equations of mo- 
tion as they linearly relate the measured forces and torques via acceleration dependent 

54 

coefficients to tlie inertial parameters. Load estimation was implemented on two robots, 
a PUMA 600 robot and the MIT Serial Link Direct Drive Arm. Good estimates were 
obtained for the load mass and center of mass and the forces and torques due to these 
loads could be accurately predicted. A good match was made between joint torques from 
the estimated joint parameters and the joint torques observed from the measured motor 
currents. However, limitations of the link inertia parameters due to restricted sensing and 
motion of some links have reduced the quality of the measurements. 

A significant limitation of these dynamic measurements is that the effects of friction 
are not taken into account. In many instances, the friction may constitute a large part of 
the required joint torque, greater than some of the other parameters which are typically 
modeled. If this is not included in the torque equation, the calculated torque may be 
in-accurate and cause errors in the desired motion of the manipulator. 

Adaptive control schemes provide another method of dynamic compensation to the 
controller. The adaptive control approach has the major advantage of not needing an 
accurate dynamic model of the system it controls. Each axis would be represented by a 
decoupled, low order dynamic model with constant parameters. An adaptive mechanism 
would vary the control parameters on-line in response to system parameter changes (either 
measured directly or estimated iteratively on-line) and cross influences from other links. 
The adaptive mechanism can be based upon an implicit system identification, where the 
control parameters are calculated using traditional control system design rules. The con- 
trol variable (the input torque) is then computed for the minimum average deviation of 
the joint trajectories from the nominal joint trajectories. 

The overall system behavior can be specified using a reference model or by creating 
an adaptive model of the system. Figure 2.24 shows the overall process for the control of 
a single joint using an adaptive control scheme. Subjected to the same input as the real 
system, the model yields the desired behavior at its output. The computational burden 
for the calculation of the control parameters and for the eventual model identification is 
considerable, as they must be performed on-line during one sampling period. Although 

Qi 

Ks 

+ 

+ ,< 

+ 

System 

Kp 

.r~\ 

Kv 

Adaptive 
Mechanism 

Qd 
Q 

55 

Figure 2.24: Adaptive Control Model of Robot Controller (Adapted from [10]) 

the computation of either Lagrangian or Newton- Euler equations is completely avoided, 
the iterative computation time is still too long for on-line operation. 

It is evident that dynamic compensation is needed for some robot controllers where 
high speed and high accuracy motions are required. In 1980, Wu and Paul [22] com- 
pleted an experiment on a single degree-of-freedom manipulator with an internal joint 
sensor. A completely linear model of the system was adopted and used to develop an ana- 
log compensation method which incorporated a torque sensor at the joint. Because the 
feedback loop was closed around the joint and all the hardware was analog, the scheme 
avoided computational difficulties, required no differential approximation and provided 
fast response. 

Similar analog compensation schemes have been implemented on other robotic test 
beds. The first two joints of the Stanford manipulator have been redesigned and fabri- 
cated to include force sensors and the associated electronics required to eliminate external 
dynamic effects. For example, an average of 1072 oz-in (7.56 Nm). was required to over- 
come pure mechanical friction when the third joint was rotated. After activating the 
direct torque compensation scheme, the amount of force required for the same task was 
reduced to 33.5 oz-in (0.24 Nm). The results of the experiments performed on the modified 
manipulator are detailed in Maples [23]. 

56 

Van Brussel, 1985 incorporated a similar compensation technique on a two degree-of- 
freedom planar manipulator. Strain gauge torque meters were installed on tlie joint shafts 
with the measured torque sent to a digital controller instead of an analog system. Similar 
improvements in the dynamic response were observed during tests of this manipulator 
[10]. 

The compensation schemes incorporating torque measuring devices will be defined as 
direct compensation schemes, where the external load torques are measured rather than 
estimated or observed. Three major advantages are realized when using the direct dynamic 
compensation: accurate dynamic models of the systems to be controlled are not required, 
no dedicated high speed computer is required, and the direct method includes frictional 
effects which were not modeled in the other compensation schemes. 

The main disadvantage to direct dynamic compensation is that external load torques 
are measured with strain gauge torque meters. For many applications on existing ma- 
nipulators, it would be difficult to place a strain gauge on a joint without making major 
modifications to the robot. A new method was devised where the load torque of a par- 
ticular joint can be accurately observed rather than being directly measured with strain 
gauges. 

The observed compensation scheme requires that various parameters of the control 
system be continuously monitored, including the motor current and tachometer output. 
With these values, the load torque can be accurately estimated and used as the input 
to the direct compensation scheme mentioned previously. Both the direct and observed 
compensation scheme will be discussed in detail later in the next section. 

Direct and Observed Dynamic Compensation Schemes 

This section will discuss the development and implementation of both the direct and 
observed compensation schemes. The direct compensation method requires that the ex- 
ternal load torques be measured directly with a torque sensor and then be used in the 
compensator. The observed compensation scheme uses an estimator to provide load torque 

57 

information to the compensator. To simplify the description of the operation of tlie com- 
pensator, some generalizations will be made as related to the operation of the amplifier. 
This will become evident as the compensation scheme is explained. 

The mechanism for direct dynamic compensation will now be developed. A direct 
compensation technique was produced that theoretically could completely eliminate the 
effects of external, time varying loads. The main idea behind this method consists of 
considering the time varying load torque acting directly upon a particular joint drive 
as a disturbance torque (uncontrollable input), to the controlled axis drive, where the 
parameters of the drive are considered to be time (position) invariant. Thus, only the 
constant loads (motor and reduction gear inertias and frictions) are considered to belong 
to the controlled system. 

Equation 2.1 can be rewritten as: 

T, = [A,,]q, + {[A,j\q, + [B,,]q-q, + [Ci,k]q(qj + Di + Ei + F{] (2.62) 

where 

Ti - the drive torque vector at joint i 

qi - the position of joint i 

[An] - the fbced inertia matrix for joint i 

[Aij] - the coupled inertia matrix between joint i and j 

[Bij] - the coefficient matrix of the centripetal forces 

[Cijk] - the coefficient matrix of the Coriolis forces 

Di - the vector of gravitational forces 

Ei - the vector of externally applied forces at the end effector transformed to the individual 
joints. 

Fi - the vector of frictional load torques 

The terms in the brackets are defined as the time varying load torques, T^. Note that 
the loads due to friction are also included in this equation. These external torques can 
be measured directly, with strain gauge torque meters incorporated in the drive system. 
The time invariant term, [Ajjjg,-, is due to the fixed inertia of a particular joint being 

Compensator 

Ls + R 

Tl 

Desired 

>6 

Kpid Kscr Kt 

+ 
> 

Actual 

Position 

Position 

\i< 

r- 

Kp 

r- 

Kpid Kscr Kt 
Ls + R 

[ 

1/Js 

, 

1/s 

-S 

_s 

— ^<^s^-* 

58 

Figure 2.25: Block Diagram of Direct Compensation Scheme 

accelerated and will be referred to as Tmi- In this case, only the inertia of the motor is 
included in the term Tmi, all other loads will be included in the time varying load, T/,-. 
Equation 2.62 can now be rewritten as: 

-'-i — -I- li 'T -L mi 

(2.63) 

The above torque equation is now rewritten so that the load torque, T;,-, is determined 
by taking the difference between the total torque produced by the servomotor, T,, and the 
motor torque, Tmi- 

Tii - T, - Tmi (2.64) 

This measured load torque is then sent to a direct dynamic compensator circuit then, 
ideally these time varying load effects will be exactly eliminated in real time. Experiments 
on VanBrussel's [10] two arm setup showed that direct compensation is feasible and easily 
implemented on a dedicated digital microprocessor. The method provides a valuable 
alternative for the computational intensive analytical methods discussed earlier. 

A simplified block diagram of the direct compensation scheme is presented in Fig- 
ure 2.25. The non-linear gains of the PID amplifier and the SCR thyristor circuit have 
been represented as Kpw and KscR respectively. 

The need of accurately modeling the various parameters will now be made evident. 
The numerator of the closed-loop transfer function, depicted in Figure 2.25 can be written 

59 

as: 

KpRpioKscnKt ^-^ , KpwKscRKtjj ^ /r, ^-\ 
uTR ^^+ LS^R ^'-^' ^^-^'^ 

The compensation voltage, U; is used to eliminate the effects of the load torque, T/. 
The proper gain of the compensator, Gci can be found by setting the last two terms of 
Equation 2.67 equal to each other and solving for 17; . 

G. = fracU.Tl = j/"^/ .,, (2.66) 

The variables in the above equation are primed because they represent the modeled values 
of their unprimed counterparts. Additionally, the measured or modeled load torque is 
denoted by a primed variable also. Substituting Equation 2.70 into Equation 2.67, the 
numerator for the direct compensated control loop can be written as: 

KpKpipKsCRKt y KpipKscRKt L's + R' rp, rp o n\ 

Ls + R '"^ LS + R K'scnK'pwI^i 

Assuming that the primed variables are equal to their unprimed counterparts, the effects 

of all external load torques can be exactly eliminated in real time. 

One disadvantage seen with these direct dynamic compensation schemes is that high 
resolution torque sensors or strain gauges must be placed at each joint axis. In many 
instances, this would require extensive modifications of existing hardware to provide an 
adequate location for the torque sensor. To circumvent this problem of hardware modifi- 
cation, a method to observe the load torque was developed which provided the required 
measured load torque to the compensation circuit. This method of compensation has been 
defined as an observed compensation scheme. 

Instead of measuring the load torque directly, the observed compensation scheme uses 
fixed motor parameters and measured variables to produce an accurate representation of 
the external load torque. The observed load torque, T/^ is then used in the same manner 
as the previously mentioned measured load torque. The methodology behind the observer 
will now be explained. Equation 2.64 can be rewritten for a single joint as: 

Ti = Tt- Tm (2.68) 

60 

For DC servomotors, there is a proportional relationship between the current applied to 
the motor, I, and the total torque output of the motor, Tt. Similarly, there is a proportional 
relationship between the armature acceleration and the torque required to accelerate the 
motor. Therefore, the load torque, T/ can be found by monitoring both the motor current 
and the rotational acceleration of the motor's armature. The relationships can be found 
in the following equation: 

Ti = Tt-T^ = Kt*I-J^ (2.69) 

where 

T; - the load torque on the motor 

Tt - The total torque produced by the motor 

T-m - the torque required to accelerate the armature inertia 

li't - the torque constant of the motor 

/ - the current applied to the motor 

J - the inertia of the motor armature 

^ - the time derivative of the armature velocity 

With this simple equation, the load torque, due to all external sources listed previously, 
can be accurately observed. The current can be directly measured using a bus-bar current 
monitoring device. Because the acceleration of the armature can not be directly monitored, 
the derivative of the motor velocity is used instead. The motor velocity is conveniently 
obtained with the motor tachometer. 

The load torque observer is represented as a block diagram in Figure 2.26. Again, it is 
important that the primed variables, Kj and J!^ be accurately known so the load torque 
can be correctly observed. If the motor acceleration, u;^ could be directly measured, 
the differentiator (denoted by the s term) in the observer could be eliminated, further 
simplifying the circuit. As mentioned before, the observed load torque, T/^ would be sent 
to the same compensation circuit used for the measured torque compensation scheme 
described earlier. 

61 

Figure 2.26: Load Torque Observer 

A simulation of the observed compensation scheme was implemented on a simplified 
model of the servo controller. For example, the PID amplifier and the SCR thyristor 
circuit were represented as constant gains. These simplifications were made to provide 
a simulation of the effects of dynamic compensation on an approximate model of the 
base servo system. The values for the other variables were obtained from the previous 
simulations of the base servo system. 

Step inputs in load torque were applied to the simulated system and both the compen- 
sated and uncompensated results are presented in Figure 2.27. The loads applied to the 
system were quite large, equivalent to a 200 pound horizontal load applied to the wrist of 
the robot in an extended configuration. This corresponds to approximately 20,000 inch 
lb (2280 N m) of torque applied to the crown gear of the robot. Without compensa- 
tion, deflections of +/- 3 *1G~'* radians were produced in the simulation. It should be 
noted that this simulation exercise did not include flexibilities of the structure or drive- 
train. The uncompensated deilections correspond to displacements of approximately +/- 
0.030 inch (0.76 mm) at the wrist with the robot in an extended configuration. With the 
compensation active, the deflections were reduced to negligible amounts. 

With the encouraging results from the simulation exercise, the compensation method 
was then implemented on the base servo system. The implementation methodology and 

62 

,D0 

0.^0 O.BD _ 1.2C 

Time (second) 

l.BO 

Compensated 

Un-Compensated 

2.00' 

Figure 2.27: Dynamic Response of Compensated System to Step Inputs in Load Torque 

results will be presented in the following section. 

Implementation Strategy and Results of an Observed Compensation Scheme 

The observed torque compensator is comprised of the load torque observer and the 
compensator gain. The design of the torque observer shall first be described. The motor 
current, / was measured using a standard bus-bar with a calibrated output of 37 mv/A. 
The schematic diagram for the load torque observer and compensation circuit is shown 
in Figure 2.28. Because the voltage proportional to the current, Vi, is a floating voltage, 
a floating source amplifier was built and the output was directed to an adjustable gain 
inverting amplifier. The output from this amplifier, U was then sent to an inverting 
summing amplifier. The voltage proportional to the motor velocity, V^ is the input for 
a low noise differentiator and the output from the differentiator, V^j is sent to the same 
adjustable gain summing amplifier as U. This summing amplifier incorporates a circuit to 
eliminate DC bias voltages. The output of this summing amplifier is the observed load 
torque, T/^. 

Next the design of the actual dynamic compensator will be presented. For this com- 

63 

Floating Voltage Amp 

10K 100K 

3K r^Wi 

Current 
Input 3K 

AAH 

3nF 

HI 

(1) 

1M 

1.6nF 

10K 

AV 

^ 

(2) 

77777 

Tach 
Input 

(3) 

270K 

AV 

77777 

Torque 
Observer 

Compensator 

270K 77777 

100K 

i 

(4) 

3K 

100K 

hAVn 

50nF 

=l> 

(5) 

100K 

A/v 

UI 

Figure 2.28: A Simplified Schematic of tlie Compensation Circuit 

64 

pensator design, the non-linearities of the PID controller were ignored to simplify the 
compensation circuit. Both the PID amplifier and the SCR circuit were modeled as linear 
gain amplifiers. In addition, the inductance of the motor was not included in the com- 
pensation circuit because the electrical time constant Tg (0.0056 second) is approximately 
equal to only 20 percent of the mechanical time constant r^ (0.027 second). This elim- 
inated an additional differentiator and summing amplifier in the compensation circuit. 
Thus the gain of the compensator,Gc is equal to: 

Gc = g (2.70) 

A linear amplifier with the appropriate gain was built, it also incorporated a low pass filter 
to attenuate high frequency noise. The output of this linear amplifier is the compensation 
voltage, Ui and is introduced to the input summing amplifier of the servomotor controller. 

Several tests were devised to determine the effectiveness of dynamic compensation. The 
uncompensated closed velocity loop, open positional loop response of the servomotor was 
used as the baseline. The closed loop velocity response of the servo system was performed 
by removing the timing belt from the motor pulley, thus eliminating positional feedback 
from the system (the resolver for the first three axes of the robot are located at the joint 
and not at the motor). Various outputs from a signal generator were introduced to the 
input summing node of the PID controller. First, step inputs, in the form of square waves, 
were commanded and the tachometer output was recorded. With the small inertial load 
of the motor, including the armature, tachometer and pulley, small over-shoots occurred 
with a settling time of 0.09 seconds. 

Next, the inertial mass of the motor was doubled by rigidly attaching a disk to the 
motor pulley, increasing the inertia to 0.175 inch lb 5ec^/rad (0.02 N m 5ec^/rad). Fig- 
ure 2.29 represents the time record of the tachometer output for the servo system with 
square wave inputs. The uncompensated signal shows the settling time to be approxi- 
mately 0.16 sec, and with the compensation active, the settling time is decreased to 0.10 
sec. A second disk was rigidly attached to the motor raising the external inertial load to 
0.35 inch lb 5ec^/rad (Q.04N m sec^/rad). Figure 2.30 reveals the settling time of the base 

65 

PQS ERROR 

1 

1 

1.000 - 

t 

RT INPUT LIM . 
CH 2 

V-^ 

1 

V 

[\ 

rv— 

: 

1Y+ ^ 

: 

VOLTS - 

/ 

J 

^ 

■ ■ 

- ■ 

/ 

■ 

-i.oaai 

J 

/ 

' r 

0.0 

LIN 

TINECSEC) 

4. 000 

POS ERROR 

1.000 

RT INPUT LIN' 

CH 2 

1Y+ 

VOLTS 

-1.Q00 

0.0 

LIN 

TIME(SEC) 

4. saa 

Figure 2.29: Time Record of Uncompensated and Compensated Response of Servo Witli 
0.175 inch lb secVrad (0.02 N m secVrad) Disk 

POS ERROR ■ 

1.000 - 

RT INPUT LIN . 
CH 2 : 
1Y+ 

f\ 

~^ 

^ 

^ H 

] r^" 

VOLTS 

\r 

\^ 

1^' 

\r 

-1.000 - 

■ 

' 

' 

0.0 

LIN 

TIMEC5EC) 

4. 000 

POS ERROR 

. 

1.000 - 

RT INPUT LIN - 
CH 2 : 

_, \ 

-n ^— . fL 

(\ 

1Y + 

^ l'^" 

n ^ 

\ 

VOLTS 

M 

/ , 

1 

} 

1 

f 

1 

-1.000 - 

U 

1/ 

'J 

i/ 

' 

0.0 

LIN 

TINECSEC) 

4. 000 

Figure 2.30: Time Record of Uncompensated and Compensa.ted Response of Servo With 
0.35 inch lb secVrad (0.04 N m sec^/rad) Disk 

66 

1/Kpid' 

rfC 

1/Kscr' 

Torque 

^ 

r 

+ 
+ ^ 

+ 
+ 1 

— w\ 

Observer 

Old 
Feedbac 

k 

New 
Feedbac 

k 

Kpid 

r 

Kscr 

Motor 

*J 

*(>y - 

>{Xi - 

^vy- 

Figure 2.31: Original and Alternate Feedback Paths For Dynamic Compensation 

servo to a step input in velocity. For the uncompensated case, the settling time was equal 
to 0.25 seconds and with the compensation active, the settling time was reduced to 0.15 
seconds. 

Another test was performed, where an impulse was commanded at the input and the 
response of the system with the medium inertial load, 0.175 inch lb 5ec^/rad (0.02 N 
m 5ec-^/rad) was evaluated. The settling time was again reduced by approjcimately 40 
percent when the compensator was active. These tests point to the conclusion that the 
compensation method introduced here does improve the dynamic response of a velocity 
servo loop. The improvement is seen without having a perfect model of the servo controller 
incorporated in the compensator circuit. Perhaps a better compensation could be provided 
if a more accurate model was used. 

Because the compensation feedback signal was introduced at the input node of the 
PID amplifier, models of both the PID amplifier and the SCR circuitry had to be included 
in the compensation gain Gc- By introducing the compensation signal to the input of the 
SCR circuit rather than the PID amplifier, an accurate model of the PID amplifier would 
no longer be required. The block diagram in Figure 2.31 illustrates the both the original 
and the alternate compensation feedback placement in the servo driver. The numerator 
for the transfer function using this alternate method is found in the following equation: 

K-pKpwKscRKt ^r , li'scRKt L's + R' 

(2.71) 

Ls^R " ' LS + R K'scRl^'t ' 

As in Equation 2.67, the load torque in Equation 2.71 is ideally eliminated when 

67 

accurate models of the SCR thyristor circuit and the servomotor are used. The alternate 
method was simulated and the results were again excellent. In the actual SCR thyristor 
circuit, a summing junction is found at the input, allowing a quick installation of this 
compensation scheme. 

Through simulation it is evident that dynamic compensation can improve the dynamic 
performance of servo mechanisms. However, the improvements on systems with high gear 
reductions, the base axis of the T3-776 for example, are virtually impossible to measure. 
For systems with small gear reductions or direct drive systems, dynamic compensation in 
one form or another is required for adequate dynamic performance. Both the direct and 
observed dynamic compensation methods are excellent dynamic compensation techniques. 
New robot designs could include the means of providing joint torque measurement schemes 
(strain gauges for example) so that direct dynamic compensation could be provided. Exist- 
ing robots could be retrofitted with the observed dynamic compensation technique without 
making modifications to the existing robot structure. 

Both the direct and observed compensation schemes would require accurate models 
of the SCR thyristor circuitry, and these models could be applied in either analog or 
microprocessor based digital compensation circuits. At this time, a simple linear model 
of the SCR circuit could be easily designed and built using analog circuits. But a more 
accurate model of the SCR, providing improved compensation, could be implemented 
much faster and efficiently in a digital circuit. These methods would provide real time 
dynamic compensation without needing an accurate dynamic model of the robot structure 
and dedicated, high cost, real time computer equipment needed for the other compensation 
schemes described earlier. 

As mentioned above, models of the servo system are required for the dynamic compen- 
sation schemes. The transfer function for the permanent magnet motors and their SCR 
thyristor circuits would be similar from robot to robot. A general model for the motor and 
driver could be produced and measuring techniques could be developed to customize the 
general model for each particular application. Additionally, some manufacturers supply 

68 

the needed transfer functions and motor parameters, reducing the modeling time further. 
In comparison, the time required to produce an accurate dynamic model of a particular 
robot is great, in many cases the robot would have to be disassembled, carefully measured 
and then re-assembled. And even then, the effects of the drivetrain friction would not 
be taken into account. As the need to improve the dynamic performance of industrial 
robots becomes more critical due to more difficult applications, robot manufacturers may 
themselves supply the needed compensation, or provide the necessary models of the motor 
drivers and motors so dynamic compensation may be conveniently added later. 

CHAPTER 3 
EXTERNAL ACTIVE COMPENSATION 

As mentioned previously, the goal of this research is to minimize positional motion 
errors of the robot. This is a huge task, and a number of variables, some unknown, affect 
the accuracy of the robot. One method of undertaking this task is first identifying the 
limitations of a particular robot. By knowing this information, a plan of action can be 
established to eliminate or reduce each item. Ideally, the robot could then be programmed 
to compensate for these errors. However, for many robots this may not be practical for 
two reasons, the dynamic response of the robot is too slow, and commanding the existing 
controller to provide the necessary compensation is difficult. In this section, these two 
factors will be discussed. 

Investigations of the servo performance of the shoulder and elbow joints of the Cincin- 
nati Milacron T3-776 robot revealed rather lethargic reactions to step inputs in position, 
and will be further explained in the following chapter entitled "Flexibility Compensa- 
tion". This slow response is typical not only for the shoulder and elbow joints, but the 
base and the wrist joints for this and other robots have similar characteristics. Presently, 
these joints can respond effectively to step inputs in position no faster than approximately 
two seconds. Their performance can be improved somewhat by adjusting or tuning the 
feedback gains of the controller for specific motions and loads. However, even with the 
controller optimaUy tuned for a certain motion, the performance of the robot servos would 
not have the dynamic capabilities required to effectively respond to some compensation 
signals. This is because the servomotor cannot produce enough torque to accelerate the 
links effectively. The dynamic response could therefore be improved by using servomotors 
which produce more torque or by reducing the inertia of the link to accelrated. Neither 
of these solutions is economically feasible. 

Assuming that the bandwidth of the robot servos was able to effectively react to 

69 

70 

the position commands, there is an additional problem. Typically, most robot software 
is proprietary or poorly documented making it quite difficult to introduce the proper 
compensatory motions to the individual servo controllers in software. This leads to the 
development of an external compensation system, which does not rely on the performance 
characteristics of the robot hardware or compatibility of the controlling software. 

In this section, the design and performance evaluation of an external single degree- 
of-freedom wrist mounted position compensator will be presented. The design criteria, 
components and evaluation techniques will also be discussed. 

External Compensation Background 

Much research has taken place about positional errors of robots, including the origins 
of these errors and more recently methods to eliminate these errors in real time. A vast 
majority of these researchers have developed the necessary tools to describe these errors 
but few have developed methods to actually eliminate these errors. Those who do, may 
rely on recalibration or other techniques for the static errors of the robot mechanism, but 
for the dynamic or active errors, they have placed the burden on the robot servos. For 
a limited number of small direct drive assembly robots, this may be acceptable, but for 
most large industrial robots, the response of their servos will fall short of the requirements 
which are necessary to eliminate the dynamic errors. 

This leads to add-on devices used to increase robot performance. These devices can 
be divided into three major categories, passive, active and independent devices. Passive 
devices could be generally described as fine tuned geometric springs which are generally 
located between the wrist flange and end effector of the robot. A well known device is the 
Remote Center Compliance (RCC) device developed by Draper Labs. They are designed 
to automatically accommodate for linear and/or angular errors present in peg-in-the- 
hole type assembly tasks, [24]. These positional errors produce forces which cause the 
compliant device to deflect in a way that the assembly forces are reduced. By the nature 
of the passive device, the assembly forces are never completely eliminated; however, they 

71 

may be greatly reduced in most cases. 

The next category of add-on devices are the active devices, including wrist mounted 
force sensors, and instrumented RCCs (IRCC). These devices can relay the forces measured 
at the wrist back to the robot controller and provide "adaptive" force control. Typically, 
force feedback is interpreted by the controller and the robot servos are commanded to 
make the appropriate adjustments. This method of control is useful for both assembly 
and machining operations. Again, remember that this method of force control relies on 
the dynamic capabilities of the robot servos to eliminate or control the position or force 
as required. 

Finally, the third category of add-on devices is the independent, actively servoed de- 
vice. The general concept of this device is to provide small amplitude, high resolution, 
high bandwidth motions which are beyond the capability of the larger general purpose 
manipulator. These devices may range from one to six degrees-of-freedom depending on 
the requirements of the application. A review of such active end-effectors will now be 
presented. 

First, a single degree-of-freedom system will be presented. Hill [25] presents a linear, 
pneumatically operated single degree-of-freedom device which has been successfully tested 
for bolt and retainer ring insertions. The stated performance characteristics for this device 
are: 

• 88 lb (387 N) capacity 

• 1 inch (25.4 mm) travel 

t 7 ounce (1.93 N) back-driveability 

No indication of of the bandwidth or positional resolution is provided although accu- 
racies to a thousandths of an inch are implied. Displacement measurements are provided 
by a LVDT sensors and force measurements are obtained by a pressure transducer located 
on the pressure cylinder. 

A two degree-of-freedom active end-effector was developed by Stanford's Aerospace 
Robotics Laboratory to provide force control for a very flexible manipulator, [26]. A 

72 

"Armature 

LED^ 

Figure 3.1: IBM X-Y Positioning Device (Adapted from [27]) 

five bar mechanism was used to provide the necessary motion of tlie end-effector and 
two electric servomotors were used to provide the necessary torque inputs. A decoupled 
controller was used to independently control the motion of end-eifector, and force control 
with a 10 Hz bandwidth was possible. This active device improved the force control 
bandwidth ten times, from the original 1 Hz capability of the flexible manipulator alone. 
Force capabilities of approximately 15 grams were available. The positional resolution of 
the device was not mentioned. 

Another two degree-of-freedom active end-effector was developed by IBM for fine po- 
sitioning capabilities, [27,28]. This device had the following characteristics listed: 

• 2.91b (12.8 N) capacity 

• 0.071 inch (1.8 mm) range 

• 0.00002 inch (0.00051 mm) resolution 

Innovative design characteristics include a two dimensional electromagnetic motor, 
flexural leaf spring suspension and non-contact LED internal positioning system, see Fig- 
ure 3.1. The flexural springs allow relative motion without wear, friction and backlash, 
which are characteristics of more traditional servo systems. 

73 

Figure 3.2; Active End-Effector Using Four-Bar Linkages (Adapted from [31]) 

Currently, two, 3 degree-of-freedom active end-effectors are under development at Stan- 
ford University, [29]. These devices are to provide industrial robots the ability to perform 
innovative workpiece acquisition and mating tasks. The first design uses four bar linkages 
to provide motion in the X-Y plane and a linear slide for motion in the Z direction, see 
Figure 3.2. The second design uses three linear slides attached in series to provide the 
motions in the X-Y-Z directions. Both designs rely on the supporting industrial robot for 

any required rotational motions. The design specifications are listed below: 

• 0.168 inch (4.26 mm) range in X,Y,Z directions 

• 9.4 in/sec (239 mm/sec) maximum speed 

• 10 lb (44 N) load capacity 

• 0.0004 inch (0.01 mm) resolution 

A survey of commercially available actuators was made, and it was found that com- 
mercially available electric actuators did not meet the design criteria. As a result, custom 
actuators will be required for this device. 

Van Brussel et al. [30] developed a prototype six degree-of-freedom hydraulically 
operated device, which provides fine positioning capabilities. The device incorporated 
internal force sensing capabilities. No specific performance characteristics were listed in 
the document. 

Mounting Plate 
for End-Effectcr 

74 

Ternary Bas 
Link 

Four-Bar Input 
Linkage 

Figure 3.3: Kinematic Representation of the Micromanipulator (Adapted from [31]) 

The Center for IntelUgent Machines and Robotics (CIMAR) at the University of 
Florida has been engaged in developing the kinematic design of a six degree-of-freedom 
parallel type device for fine motion or force control [31]. This device has been named a 
micromanipulator. Based on a parallel mechanism similar to the Stewart Platform, the 
device is specifically designed for small motions. As illustrated in Figure 3.3, the end of 
each leg is is connected to a four-bar mechanism. The desired platform motion is provided 
by driving the six independent rotary inputs. The four bar linkages are used to increase 
the mechanical advantage of the inputs and to improve the positional resolution of the 
output. A set of performance specifications has been suggested for the initial prototype 
design: 

• 100 lb (440 N) load capacity 

75 

• +/- 0.1 in (2.54 mm) translation 

• +/- 2 degree rotation 

• 1 part in 1000 resolution 

• 50 Hz maximum bandwidth 

• 6 in (152 mm) diameter, 6 in length (152 mm) 

The load capacity which has been suggested corresponds to a much lower bandwidth 
operation than the 50 Hz stated above. For those applications requiring higher band- 
widths, the load requirement will have to be relaxed somewhat, [31]. 

Most of the work on active end-effectors has been aimed at improving the assembly 
capabilities of industrial robots. In these tasks, the actual assembly process is time- 
independent and the variation in the contact forces are generally well-behaved. For time 
independent tasks, such as light machining operations, the variations in the contact forces 
can be extreme, due to the dynamic cutting forces at the tool. This provides a challenging 
application for active end-effector devices, [31]. It is with this knowledge that the single 
degree-of-freedom active end-effector was designed and installed on the T3-776 robot. 

Design Criteria of Position Compensator 

To reduce the problems associated with an internal compensation scheme, an external 
means of compensation was investigated and found to have several distinct advantages: 

• The added compensator needs only a short travel equal to the maximum positional 
error of the robot. 

• The compensator can be designed for quick response and optimal dynamic charac- 
teristics. 

• An external compensator can be designed to provide greater positional resolution 
than that of the robot. 

• The controller for the compensator is completely separate from the robot controller 
making this method of compensation universally applicable to other types of robots. 

• 

76 

The computational requirements for the compensation are greatly reduced. Com- 
pensatory displacements at the tool do not have to be back transformed to the robot 
joint coordinates. 

• To implement the compensation, only the displacement error has to sent to the 
compensator. 

• The displacement error could be computed by the compensator controller using tool 
displacement information from the robot and external sensor information. 

• This external compensator could also be used in a force control mode for deburring, 
grinding or other applications requiring force control. 

From the above list and specific characteristics of the T3-776 robot, design require- 
ments for the external compensator were formulated and listed below: 

• Limited travel of +/- 0.04 inch (1 mm). 

• Minimum positional bandwidth of 7 Hz. 

• Positional resolution of 0.001 inch (0.025 mm) or better. 

• Use an independent controller. 

• Produce a minimum of 200 lb (90 Kg) force output. 

• Rugged design for harsh industrial environment. 

• Utilize off-the-shelf components for low cost. 

With these requirements used as a guideline, the design of the compensator com- 
menced. 

For edge milling, the original application of the external compensator, only a single 
degree-of-freedom must be accurately controlled, ie. the direction normal to the desired 
contour of the workpiece. Only displacement errors normal to the desired motion of the 
tool would affect the accuracy of the workpiece. Because the robot has six degrees-of- 
freedom, the orientation of the cutting tool could always be maintained normal to the 
desired motion of the cut. A prismatic joint or slider could be attached to the end effector 

77 

of the robot and could provide the necessary compensatory displacement or force in the 
direction normal to the cut [32]. 

Several different methods of providing the necessary linear motion were investigated: 

• Linear displacement systems with stepper type actuators. 

• Precision slide table with recirculating ball screw movement and stepper motor ac- 
tuator. 

• Precision slide table with cam and roller follower movement and high torque pancake 
motor actuator. 

The first two methods allow precision displacement control of the slide table with rel- 
atively large displacement capabilities, 6 to 12 inches (150 to .300 mm) typical. However, 
the maximum displacement required from the compensator will be 0.08 inch (2.0 mm) or 
less because in the worse case, with the robot fully extended with the maximum rated load 
of 200 pounds (90 Kg) applied, the maximum deflection of the end effector is 0.044 inch 
(1.1 mm). This makes the large displacement capabilities unnecessary. Also, these method 
allow only moderate forces to be applied (or absorbed) and this limits the potential capa- 
bilities of the robot with a 200 pound (90 Kg) load rating. 

The requirements of high accuracy, large force generation capabilities and limited 
displacement are well within the capabilities of a linear rise cam. Thus, the linear rise 
cam was selected for the following reasons: the ability to quickly transmit large forces, the 
simplicity and ruggedness of the transmission, the high positional accuracy and perceived 
cost benefits. 

Mechanical Design of Compensator 

In this section, a brief description of the mechanical components of the single degree- 
of-freedom compensator will be presented. Figure 3.14 reveals the components of the 
mechanical servo assembly. The prime mover is a DC pancake type motor, manufactured 

78 

position table 

an. 

Figure 3.4: Mechanical Diagram of External Compensator (Adapted from [8]) 

by PMI Motors, model number U12M4HT. It is capable of producing a peak torque of 
1846 oz in (13 Nm) and a continuous torque of 171.1 oz in (1.2 Nm) and because of its 
pancake type construction, the moment of inertia is small, 0.028 oz in sec^ (0.0002 Nm 
sec^). The motor also contains an integral tachometer and 1000 bit per revolution encoder. 

The output shaft of the motor is connected to the cam shaft by a timing belt assembly, 
with a 2.44:1 gear reduction. The timing belt is effective in reducing the load torque 
perceived by the motor and further increases the positional resolution of the system. The 
steel camshaft is 3.15 inch (80 mm) long with an unsupported span of 2.28 inch (58 mm) 
and has a diameter of 0.79 inch (20 mm). The shaft is supported by a set of single row 
angular contact ball bearings with a contact angle of 30 degrees. The lower cam shaft 
bearing is placed in a blind hole seat, while the upper bearing is preloaded by a cover 
plate. The cam and the timing sprocket are held in place by a setting nut, which is used 
to force the components against a shaft seat. 

The linear rise cam, is used to transmit the rotary motion produced by the motor to 
the linear motions required by the linear slide table. The cam has a diameter of 1.57 inch 
(40 mm), and a linear rise of 0.078 inch (2 mm) over a rotation of 350 degrees. A spring 
loaded roller cam follower is directly attached to the linear positioning table. The spring 
applies enough pressure so that the follower is always preloaded against the cam. The 
linear positioning table has a maximum travel of 1.0 inch (25.4 mm) and is equipped with 
two sets of pre-loaded, crossed roller bearings for increased lateral stiffness. 

79 

External 
Compensator 

Figure 3.5: External Compensator Mounted on Robot 

A bracket was designed to rigidly attach the high speed pneumatic router to the slide 
table. The router was manufactured by Dotco Inc., model number 11T4318A-62, and 
has a rated output of 2 horsepower (1.5 Kw) at 18000 RPM. The servomotor and the 
linear positioning table were rigidly mounted to the base plate. Finally, the entire timing 
belt assembly, cam shaft, cam and follower were enclosed by the side plates, upper plate, 
and the base plate. These plates were manufactured of aluminum, and provide a rigid 
structure for the compensation mechanism. 

Most of the components were manufactured by the in-house machine shop at the 
University of Florida from engineering drawings developed by E. Stern and modified as 
required by the author. In addition, the linear rise cam was made on a White Sundstrand 
CNC vertical milling machine located in the Machine Tool Laboratory at the University 
of Florida. A representative drawing of the external compensator mounted on the robot 
is shown in Figure 3.5. 

80 

Xd 

Xe 

POP 
11/23 

Shared 
Memory 

. 

PDP 
11/03 

D/A 

^/<r>s_ 

Servo 
Control 

*v9- 

DRV11J 

- ' 

i 

i 

I 

Tach 

' 

1 

Flex 
Model 

Force 

H' 

1 

r 

F/T 
Dyno 

Servo 
Motor 

Counter 
Circuit 

Tool Position 

r 

" 

X 

Gear 

Reduce 

Figure 3.6: Schematic of Original Compensator Controller 

Electronic Components of Compensator 

This section will provide an overview of the electronic components of the compen- 
sator including the servo controller, encoder counter circuit, computer interface and the 
force/torque dynamometer. Figure 3.6 provides a schematic overview of the original con- 
trolhng method of the compensator. Forces measured at the robot's wrist dynamometer 
were sent to the controlling computer, via a parallel port. The estimated deflection of 
the robot, Xd, was calculated by multiplying a predetermined flexibility matrix by the 
measured forces in the main computer. Through a shared memory, A''^ was sent to the 
satellite computer, where the actual position, Xa, was subtracted from Xd- The result 
was Xe, the positional error and it was converted to an analog signal and this signal was 
used by the servo amplifier to control the position of the servomotor. 

The servo system was controlled by a pair of 16 bit micro-computers. The main 
computer was a Digital Equipment Corporation PDP-11/23-03 and its primary function 
was to calculate the desired compensatory displacement for the servo system. The force 
vector, F^, provided in real time (100 Hz), was multiplied via a FORTRAN program by 
the flexibility matrix, FLEX, and the product was Xd- The PDP-11/03 satellite computer 
was used for data acquisition and release and computing the positional error command, 
Xe, via a MACRO program. The main and satellite computers communicated through 
4096 bytes of shared memory. A Datel data conversion unit provided analog to digital 

81 

(A/D) and digital to analog (D/A) functions and was interfaced to the PDP-11/03. The 
input of the servo amplifier was provided by one of the 12 bit D/A converters. 

During the real time operation of the system, the shared memory was used to pass 
data between the two computers. When one processor accessed the shared memory, an 
on-board arbitrator locked out the other processor. Upon the completion of the read or 
write operation, the other processor was given access to the memory if it had been waiting. 
The shared memory simplified the interfacing software since both computers could operate 
asynchronously. Both the main and satelUte computers ran their respective programs at 
approximately 100 Hz. 

A Digital Equipment Corporation DRV-llJ board was used as the parallel interface to 
the PDP-11/03. The four programmable ports on the DRV-llJ contain 16 I/O lines and 
are capable of transferring 16 bit words between the LSI-11 bus of the PDP-11/2.3-03 and 
the connecting devices. Handshake lines between the external devices and the DRV-llJ 
ensure accurate data transfer. Port A on the Jl pin connector took data from the wrist 
dynamometer and Port D on the J2 connector was connected to the counter circuit of the 
encoder. 

The servo amplifier PMI model SSSA 41-10-30, is a four quadrant pulsed width mod- 
ulated (PWM) servo amplifier designed to drive the permanent magnet DC servomotor 
described earlier. With three input channels to the comparator amplifier, the position com- 
mand signal directed to channel one, having the maximum gain input. The accelerometric 
compensation signal was sent to channel two and tachometer output (velocity feedback) 
was directed to channel three, which had the lowest gain. The tachometer which had 
an output constant of 8.10 volt/lOOG RPM was of course connected to provide negative 
feedback. 

The encoder, PMI model M23-1000-ABI-5 provides 1000 counts per revolution. It 
incorporates a LED light source and a monolithic radial phototransistor array. The output 
produces two channels of square wave pulses which are 90 degrees phase shifted. For one 
counting cycle, four 'checks' are made to determine direction and count. 

82 

V(t _^ _^ Vet - - jz. '^'- ***• y*. A'f- 

tTTl TTT ■ • 

'( IV n 'i .5 

11 I L 

l^'JlTtT^^ 

ITT 

V,. J 

^ " 

w/ 11- 

1" 

*■£ 

im 

ffffP 

r 

H ,1 'k I' >' 1 J 

m 

Li 115 

v!.„ 

iUMi 

/.5 /7y 

n 

iS /93 

^I 

TT 

.f]"! 

/.5 /?i 

n 

r 

UJi 

t 5 37^ 

H 

Ai V?J 

ajJE 

Figure 3.7: 16 Bit Counter Circuit 

A 16 bit counter was used to close the positional loop, Figure 3.7. Originally, an INTEL 
2716, a 16 K erasable prom (EPROM), was used to determine whether the encoder outputs 
were counts up or down. The 2716 was later replaced by a pair of nand gates after several 
instances of memory loss. The latched output is then sent to a 16 bit cascading counter 
comprised of four MSI LS193 synchronous up/down counters. The output of the counters 
is sent to another buffer before being sent to the digital port of the controller. Hand 
shakes are required before the data in the buffers are dumped. The latches are necessary 
to prevent lost counts, for example, if the encoder output was changing as it was being 

83 

sampled. A 5 MHz clock synchronized the latched buffers. A manual reset switch was 
provided so that the counters and buffers could be set to zero. 

The force/torque dynamometer used was a Robot Sensor Systems, Incorporated model 
150/600. The sensor has a force resolution of 1 pound (0.45 Kg) over a +/- 150 pound 
(68.2 Kg) range and a torque resolution of 1 pound-inch (0.0117 Kg-m) over a 600 pound- 
inches (7.0 Kg-m) range. The dynamometer incorporates a six degree-of-freedom sensor 
frame which is instrumented with strain gauges. The strain gauge frame is flexible in 
nature and introduces additional variables to the flexibility model of the robot. 

The force/torque sensor has two potential sources of error which should be modeled 
and taken into account for various tasks. The first is the flexibility of the sensor frame, the 
second is a backlash associated with the dynamometer mount. The flexibility of the sensor 
was not originally taken into account, and some displacement errors could not be originally 
accounted for. These errors were finally traced to the sensor frame. The flexibility of the 
sensor frame was statically measured by applying forces and measuring the displacement 
with a capacitance probe. Figure .3.8 shows the static flexibility measurement setup. The 
force was incrementally increased by adding weights to the system and the displacement of 
both the robot wrist flange and the tool was measured. The difference of the displacements 
was automatically produced by the capacitance probe electronics and manually recorded 
for each increment force. The slope of the plot revealed a flexibility of approximately 
1.6*10'' in/lb (92.2 m/N). The flexibility of the sensor was measured only in the direction 
parallel to the sliding motion of the compensator, labeled the positive Y direction on the 
sensor frame. The flexibility of the sensor frame is the same order of magnitude to that 
of the robot, so it should be included in the flexibility model. 

The backlash of the sensor was noticed when forces were applied in both the positive 
and negative Y directions in sensor frame coordinates. When forces were applied in the 
positive Y direction, the sensor was displaced because of its internal flexibilities. When no 
more forces were applied the sensor would return to its original displacement. However, 
when a force was applied in the opposite direction (-Y) the displacement would jump 

84 

Capacitanc 
Probe #2 

Capacitance 
Probe #1 

F/T Dynamometer 

Static Force 
Applicator 

Figure 3.8: Static Flexibility Measurement of Force Sensor 

approximately 0.010 inch (0.25 mm). For the edge milling operation, the backlash would 
not effect performance of the compensator because forces are applied in only one general 
direction, towards the compensator, not away from it. For other applications, the backlash 
may have to be accounted for. 

A microprocessor is used to transform the force transducer data into Cartesian force/torque 
components. Two communication ports are provided to transmit this data to the user: an 
RS-232C serial interface and a 16 bit TTL compatible interface. The serial interface is used 
to enter system commands and the parallel interface is used to transmit the force/torque 
data. Resolved data strings with the three forces and three torques and system health can 
be transmitted at 100-110 Hz over the parallel port. Experience demonstrates the need of 
shielded cables for the transmission of parallel data. Without the proper shielding, bits 
are lost, aliasing occurs and communication between devices stops or the data becomes 
unintelligible. 

The PDP 11/23-03 combination was used for several reasons including: its ability 

85 

Xd 

' 

IBM 

PC/AT 

_ 

D/A 

— »k5^i- 

Model 

Servo 

Contro 

DRVU 

"^ 

»vy 

i 

I 

i 

Too 

Position 

1 

Tjch 

t 

I 

Force 

F/T 
Dyno 

t 

:;oun(cr 
Circuit 

Servo 
Motor 

X 

1 ' 

Gtar 
Reduce 

Figure 3.9: Schematic of Second Generation Controller 

to provide real time control, much of the required hardware was readily available and 
the author was familiar with its operation. This method of control worked quite well. 
However, an alternative method to provide the control of the compensator was required 
due to logistic constraints, the T3-776 robot was being moved to a remote location. An 
IBM PC/AT was used to replace the previous computer control system. 

Figure 3.9 shows the second generation computer controller. The block diagram is 
identical except for the computer and I/O peripherals. The Datel D/A board was replaced 
by a Data Translation DT2801 board with 12 bit resolution. The DRV-llJ board was 
replaced by a pair of Omnicomps Graphics Corporation PCll paxallel boards. The PCll 
was designed to emulate the operation of DRV-11 boards in a PC environment. This 
method of control provided a low cost alternative as compared to the cost of duplicating 
the prcYioufi V\}V-\\l'M-^'i cnntrnllcri In addition to hfiing GQfit (^ffoctive, \Am p^^rformance 
of the PC based controller was superior to that of the PDP-11/23-03. 

Software Components of Compensator 

To complete the design of the compensator, controlling software was developed. The 
original PDP-11/2.3-03 based controller utilized four different programs to control the 
compensator: 

86 

1. A Fortran program which calculated the flexibility coefficients given the position of 
the end effector, this program ran off-line. 

2. A Fortran program which multiplied the flexibility coefficients by the measured forces 
and torques, and the resulting product was equal to the desired displacement of the 
compensator, Xd- 

3. An assembly program which acquired the force/torque information and the encoder 
position, Xa- 

4. An assembly program which compared the actual encoder position to the desired 
position and the difference, X^ drove the compensator. 

The first program, which was used off-line, produced the flexibility coefficients for the 
robot given the tool coordinates. This program would be implemented to provide the 
flexibility matrices at some given interval along the entire tool path. The displacement at 
the tool was due to two distinct flexibilities, flexibilities of the robot structure and of the 
wrist. The flexibility matrices were stored and at the appropriate time they were recalled 
manually. Further details about the development of the flexibility matrix can be found in 
the chapter entitled "Flexibility Compensation". 

The following equation was used in the second program to calculate the desired dis- 
placement for the compensator: 

[Disp]t = {[Flex], + [Flex]^) * [Force]j, (3.1) 

[Disp]t = [Flex] * [Force]p (3.2) 

where 

[Disp]^ - the required compensation displacement at the tool 

[Flex]^ - the flexibilities due to the robot structure 

[Force] - the externally applied forces at the end effector of the robot 

[Flex]^ - the flexibilities due to the wrist 

87 
[F/ea;] - the combined flexibility matrix 

A program using Equation 3.2 was implemented in real time to provide the required 
displacement of the compensator to eliminate the displacement errors due to robot flexi- 
bilities. Because the tool position was not revealed to the controlling computer directly, 
the position dependant flexibility matrices were not automatically utilized in software. 
Instead, the flexibility matrices were manually transferred to the interactive controlling 
program. This did not present a major problem since the flexibility matrices changed 
only gradually over the tool paths. Cincinnati Milacron has since developed a software 
package that would allow a DEC type system to communicate with the robot controller. 
The Remote Real Time Interface would allow a near real time generation of the flexibility 
matrices to be produced on-line. 

The third program was used to obtain the output of the force/torque microprocessor 
and the encoder position from the counter circuit and put the values in the shared memory. 
The forth program was used to calculate the difference between the desired position, 
Xd. and the actual position Xa of the compensator. The difference, A'e was sent to the 
D/A converter and used to drive the servo amplifier. These Macro programs ran at 
approximately 200 Hz or twice as fast as the force/torque monitoring system. 

These Macro programs were modeled after similar routines used by the PDP-11/0.3 to 
control the MBA robot in the CIMAR laboratory. Different addresses had to be used for 
both the parallel ports and the D/A port. 

When the controlling computer was replaced by the IBM PC/AT, the software was re- 
written in TurboPascal. A single program was written to replace the three final programs 
described previously. The flexibility matrices were entered manuaUy. The actual working 
program was able to operate at approximately 300 Hz. A copy of this program can be 
found in Appendix D. 

In both sets of software, an algorithm was implemented which would provide a smooth 
transition about origin (or initial value) of the counter. Remember that digital devices such 
as the counter do not provide negative numbers, so they have to be artificially produced 

88 

P(sK 

*^r-* 

Tl 

^..-^ 

Kp 

\H 

•>. 

Ka 

+ r 

^^ 

Kt 
Ls+R 

1 

1 

^/— . 

+Ts 

- 1 

*\y " 

Js 

Hs 

, i *- 

T 

Ke 

. Feec 
Bacl' 

i 

^ 

Pa 

Figure 3.10: Block Diagram Representation of External Compensator 

in software. For example, the counter circuit has a useful range of to 4095 counts, or 12 
bits, the maximum number of counts required for a complete revolution of the linear rise 
cam. When the cam is at its desired origin, at the center of the linear face, the counter 
circuit was reset to zero. The output of the counter about the origin has the following 
series output: 

.... 4093 4094 4095 0123.... 

If the shaft was rotated slightly counter-clockwise, the out put of the counter circuit 
would jump suddenly from values approximately equal to zero, to values above 4000. This 
would cause the system to become unstable. A subroutine was written so that encoder 
values greater than 2048 would have the number 4096 subtracted from it. This would 
place the non-linearity in the counts at the non-linear step in the surface of the linear rise 
cam, which was intentionally avoided. The series took on the following structure: 

.... -3 -2 -1 1 2 3 2047 2048 -2047 -2046 .... 

Not only did this algorithm stabilize the system, but it also allowed negative displace- 
ments to be commanded. 

Dynamic Response of External Position Compensator 

To predict the capabilities of the servo system, it was first simulated with an ACSL 
program. A block diagram of the simulated system can be seen in Figure 3.10 and most 
of the constants were provided by PMI for the servomotor and servo amplifier. Non- 

89 

0.0M)&e 

RT INPUT LIN 

CH 1 

IX- 

INCHES 

DISPLfiCEMENT 

' ■ ' ■ I ■ ' ■ ■ f ■ ' ' ' 

0.Q 

K- 

J 

TlMEtSEIC): 1.297 

: 1 ■ I I 

LIN TlflECSEC) 

ftMPL: 0.0U76 

REJ7 r 

T 1 r 

2,080 

Figure 3.11: Simulated Response of Active Compensator to a Step Input 

linearities such as the current limits of the amplifier are easily modeled in this simulation 
environment. Figure 3.11 is tlie simulated positional response of the system to a step 
input in position. By adjusting the position and velocity gains, significant changes can be 
made to the system response, as expected. 

A simple control program was first written to evaluate the actual positional response 
of the servo mechanism. It allowed the operator to input a desired encoder value, which 
was directly related to the displacement of the slide. The displacement of the slide was 
measured with a capacitance probe with 0.0005 inch resolution, and then recorded real 
time on a GenRad datalogger. As can be seen in Figure 3.12, the servo system is responsive 
when compared to the positional step response of the robot. The following parameters 
give an idea of the response of the closed positional loop: 

ts - 2% settling time of 0.15 sec tp - peak time of 0.06 sec 

tr - rise time of 0.02 sec. (10-90%) tj, - delay time of 0.03 sec 
Mp - maximum overshoot of 15% 

Because Figures 3.11 and 3.12 closely resemble each other, one may assume that an 

90 

1.000 

Byf^ GUT 

J 1 I ! L_ 

RT INPUT LIN J 

CH Z i 

1X+ 4 

VOLTS ^ 

-1.000 

I 1 1 1 r- 

0. 5000 

"~T ' I r- 
LIN 

-I L 

^ I L 

-J 1 1 1 1" 

TIMCtSEC) 

'.500 

Figure 3.12: The Actual Response of the External Compensator to a Step Input 

accurate model of the servo system has been made. An accurate model is useful when 
simulating other control techniques without having to build actual hardware and soft- 
ware prototypes. In fact this model was used later to simulate the effectiveness of an 
accelerometric compensation scheme designed to provide additional improvements to the 
positional accuracy of the robot. 

The additional compensation slide demonstrates an improvement in the positional 
performance as compared to the other joints of the robot. Additionally, the increased 
positional resolution of the table is much better than that of the combined positional 
resolution of the robot. The optimum resolution of the external compensator can be 
demonstrated in the following way: 

Dr = {Cr){Tr){T,} (3.3) 

where 

Dr - displacement resolution of (1,186 counts)/mm 

Ct - cam rise of (2 mm)/(350 deg) 

Tr - timing ratio of 2.44:1 

Td - track density of (360 deg)/(10G0 counts) 

Theoretically, the smallest detectable linear motion of the slide table would be approx- 
imately one micron, or 1/Dr- Of course, the accuracy of the compensator is influenced by 
the flexibilities in the mechanical assembly and on the accuracy of the cam. The linearity 
of the cam was tested by writing a program which would increment the desired position of 

91 

Displacement in MM 

2.40 

i.eo 

0.80 

o 
o 
o 

-0 .80 

-1.60 

-2.40 

Encoder Counts 

Figure 3.13: Linearity Check of Cam Surface 

the table by one count per cycle in the control program. Again, the position of the slide 
table was recorded with the capacitance probe and the result is depicted in Figure 3.13. 
The slope is nearly linear, implying a well machined cam, which provides the required 
linear response. 

The system was able to respond quite well to dynamic inputs. For example, a sine wave 
of 5 Hz was commanded at the positional input of the system, and the recorded output of 
the positional table matched the input with little phase shift. Overall, the capabilities of 
the compensator were quite good including: fast response, excellent resolution, large force 
output and durable construction. 

External Force Compensation 

The methodology of using the single degree-of-freedom compensator for position com- 
pensation was given above. The device accurately provides the desired displacement of 
the tool in a rapid manner. This external compensator could also be used to control exter- 
nal forces for grinding, deburring and other applications requiring accurate force control. 

92 

Several researchers have described force control strategies for robots, where some imple- 
mentations are strictly force controllers and others are hybrid force/position controllers. 
Whitney [33] presents an excellent review of robot force control. A brief description 
of several current methods of current force control strategies will now be presented. 

Hybrid Position/Force Control 

Hybrid force/position control combines force and torque information with manipulator 
position and orientation data to satisfy simultaneous position and force constraints [34]. 
Hybrid position /force control partitions the various degrees-of-freedom of the robot to ei- 
ther force or position control. The partition is dependent on the mechanical and geometric 
constraints of the performed task [35]. Position constraints exist along the normal to a 
surface where the presence of a surface constrains the range of motion. Force constraints 
exists along the surface tangents where it is impossible to apply arbitrary forces. 

Obviously, in free space, the robot has no constraints and thus has six positional 
degrees-of-freedom. However, if the end effector was fixed to ground, there would be 
no positional degrees-of-freedom, but an arbitrary force could be applied in any direction. 
Figure 3.14 shows five, four, and three degrees-of-freedom position constraints. Conversely, 
the figure also illustrates one, two and three degrees-of-freedom force constraints. The 
constraint space does not directly coincide with the joints of the manipulator. It is a 
six degree-of-freedom Cartesian system defined with respect to the task geometry, with 
i degrees-of-freedom dedicated to position constraints and 6,- degrees-of-freedom for force 
constraints. 

R.aibert and Craig [37] developed a hybrid controller. The position of the end effector 
was monitored by the factory instaUed joint encoders or resolvers. The force was monitored 
by a wrist mounted force/torque sensor. Position and force errors were multiplied by a 
compliance selection matrix which informed the controller whether degrees-of-freedom of 
the task were position or force constrained. The actuator control signal for the f"' joint 

93 

Figure 3.14: Constrained End Effector Freedom of Motion, a) Five DOF. b) Four DOF. 
c) Tliree DOF. (Adapted from [36]) 

has six components from the constraint space for the six degree-of- freedom robot: 

6 

T^^Y1 Ttj-t^j^/;] + *=.[(1 - ^j)^^j] (3.4) 

where 

Ti - torque applied to the ?*'' actuator 

A/j - force error in the jf*^ DOF of constraint space 

Axj - position error in the _;''' DOF of constraint space 

F,.,- - force compensation function for j*'' input and the iti^'^ output 

^ij - position compensation function for j*'' input and the iti'^'^ output 
Sj - component of the compliance selection output 

The compliance selection vector, S, is a binary N-tuple that specifies which degrees-of- 
freedom in the the constraint frame are under force control and which are under position 
control [34]. For example, if 

5 = [0,0,1,0,1,1] (3.5) 

94 

then 

T, = *.i(Aari) + *.-2(Aa:2) + r.3(A/3)+ (3.6) 

*.-4(Aa;4) + r.-5(A/5) + T,e{^fe) 

Though the total number of active control loops is always six (for a six axis robot) the 
type mix will vary as the task geometry and constraints change. 

Hybrid position/force control requires an explicit description of the workpiece in terms 
of position and force constraints. This description may be conceptually straight forward, 
for example, a deburring operation may require a constant force of 1.1 lb (5 N) to be ap- 
plied in the normal direction while traveling at a tangential speed of 2 in/sec (5 cm/sec). 
Translating these conceptual constraint descriptions into a form the control system un- 
derstands is computationally difficult for all but the simple tasks. Developing a method 
to derive the compliance selection vector is the major limitation to this type of control. 
In addition, accurate models of the controller must be developed or provided before the 
force control can be effectively implemented. 

Compliant Control 

Compliaiit control is a position/force control method similar to hybrid control. In 
certain respects, hybrid control is a modification and extension of compliant control, de- 
veloped by Paul [20]. Both approaches employ a task related constraint vector and they 
use this constraint to partition the system into position and force controlled subspaces. 
Force and position may both be specified at the end eifector. However, in this imple- 
mentation, some robot joints are used to provide position control and the others are used 
to provide the necessary force control. This method usually results in both position and 
force errors which are corrected on subsequent cycles by adjusting the position and force 
set point. 

This method eliminates the need of transforming the constraint vector as required by 
the hybrid control scheme. For some tasks, certain joints of the robot would be selected 

95 

for force control and for other tasks a different group of joints may be selected for force 
control, while the remainder are used for position control. 

Joint Torque Control 

Joint torque control is a method which allows force control at the robot end effector by 
monitoring the torques at the individual joints of the robot. This is an example of internal 
force control, where the joint actuators of the robot are directed to provide the proper 
force at the end effector. Because the force of the end effector is controlled explicitly, 
position control can not be specified for the end effector. Neglecting gravity and friction 
and assuming a static case, the forces at the end effector, Fg are related to the joint, Ti 
torques by the inverse of the Jacobian [J] transpose: 

Fe - [J]-^T, (3.7) 

This allows the forces at the end effector to be easily controlled for this simple example. 
For an ideal dynamic system, with no friction or gravity effects, the torque equation 
becomes quite complex and includes position dependant matrices [P*] and [/*] related to 
joint velocity (p and joint acceleration (p respectively: 

r, = [jfF, + <^[P10^ + [r]0 (.3.8) 

The force at the end effector can conceivably be calculated by using a form of the above 
equation, but the [P*] and [J*] matrices are difficult to accurately model and implement 
in a real time controller. 

After measuring the joint torques and computing the applied force at the end effector, 
the difference between the applied and desired force would be used to drive the servo 
mechanism in a torque control fashion. Strain gauges located at each joint could directly 
measure the joint torques, or torque observers could be used instead. The driving torque 
for the system would be the difference between the actual and desired torques for the 
joints, ie: 

T,, = T,a - {[jfF,, + un'i^d + [n4>d) (3.9) 

96 

where the subscript a denotes actual values and d denotes desired values. With this 
equation, the forces produced at the end effector are only approximate, errors in the 
torque equation will introduce definite errors in the force produced at the end effector. 
However, if the force was directly measured at the end effector, the force errors would 
be directly known and these values could be used to drive the servos with the following 
equation: 

r,, - [jf{F,a - F,d) + (0a - ^d)[P']{4>a " 4>df + [Hik ' 4>d) (3.10) 

and for slow motions, where the effects of [P*] and [/'] become small, the above equation 
could be simplified to: 

r,e = [jf{Fea - F,d) (3.11) 

Joint torque control has several limitations, it can only provide force control, no po- 
sition control; the actual equations relating joint torques to end effector forces and vice 
versa are more complex than just presented, because the actual system contains gravity 
and frictional effects as well. The complex [P*] and [/'] matrices must be calculated in 
real time for true dynamic applications. 

Pure Force Control 

Pure force control is similar to joint torque control in that forces at the end effector are 
controlled. This is also an internal force control method, where the robot actuators are 
controlled to provide the necessary applied force at the end effector. A force sensor is used 
at the wrist to sense the actual end effector forces. These measured forces are compared 
to the forces desired at the end effector and their difference is used to drive the robot. A 
simple equation is used to relate the necessary displacement of a single degree-of-freedom 
system to eliminate a force error: 

X = ^^^ (3.12) 

where fa is the actual force measured at the end effector, fd is the desired force at the 
end effector, k is the structural stiffness of the robot structure and x is the displacement 

97 

required to eliminate the force error. For complex structures, a robot for example, the 
above equation is expanded to: 

xi = [STIFF]-'F, (3.13) 

Where [STIFF] is a position dependent matrix used to describe the stiffness of the robot, 
or in a form that will be used later in the section on flexibilities: 

X. = [FLEXjFi (3.14) 

where [FLEX], the position dependent flexibility matrix is the inverse of the stiffness 
matrix and Fi is the applied force. The force would actually be a combination of three 
forces along the fixed Cartesian coordinate frame at the wrist and three torques about 
those axes. In addition, the flexibility matrix [FLEX] is position dependant and would have 
to be accurately modeled for real time control. The displacements Xi, actually represent 
linear and rotational displacements at the end effector. The displacements values at the 
wrist would then have to be back transformed to joint coordinates, and the traditional 
position controlled joints could properly respond. Figure 3.15 illustrates the force control 
scheme for a typical robot controller. The force loop is external to the standard position 
control. 

During typical positional control, the force feedback gain matrix G'l, would be set 
to zero and the positional input gain matrix G2, would be set equal to the identity ma- 
trix. The desired end effector position vector X^j, would be transformed to desired joint 
positions Qu, through Qed using the standard Jacobian method as seen in the following 
equation: 

Q,H = [J]'^X,d (3.15) 

The difference between the desired, 0,^ and actual joint position, Q,a, would be used to 
drive the servos. The actual end effector position, X^a should be exactly known because the 
actual positions of the individual joints are known and the end effector of the manipulator 
is kinematicaUy constrained to be at a given location by the following relationship: 

Xea = [J]~'^Q,a (3.16) 

98 

Xd 

G2 

Fd 

^*®— ^^><S^ 

- /^ 

3 
o' 

Servo 1 

Servo 2 

Servo 3 

Servo 4 

*■ Servo 5 

Servo 6 

01 

3 
o' 
ro 

Xea 

Ka 

Fea 

— ^ 

Figure 3.15: Force Control for Typical Robot Control Architecture 

99 

When operating in the pure force control mode, the force feedback gain matrix, d 
would be set equal to the identity matrix and the positional input gain matrix, G^ would 
be set to zero. Forces at the end effector F^^, would be measured and compared to the 
desired end effector forces F^d, and the difference would be multiplied by the inverse of the 
position dependant stiffness matrix, [FLEX] otherwise known as the flexibility matrix. 

If the stiffness of the robot was accurately modeled, so that actual structural stiffness, 
Ka was equal to the modeled stiffness, Km then the desired force could be exactly produced 
instantaneously for the ideal servo system. Of course, real servo systems introduce time 
lags, non-linearities and modeling errors, which introduce additional force errors. Because 
most servo systems include an integrator in the loop, the force errors could be eliminated 
over time even if the system flexibility was not exactly modeled. 

There are two major disadvantages of this method of pure force control, an accurate 
stiffness model of the robot should be developed for improved performance and the band- 
width of this system is limited to the bandwidth of the robot servos. For some applications, 
the response of the robot will be too sluggish and the force errors may reach unacceptable 
levels. As mentioned in the introduction of this chapter, external force control is certainly 
being considered and tested at this time. 

Recently, several researchers have attempted to use this method offeree control for sev- 
eral applications including: deburring, brushing, grinding, dispersion of film adhesives and 
inspection [38,39,40,41,42]. In one particular application, force control was implemented 
on a General Electric P50 5-DOF robot to provide a controlled force in any direction of 
x,y plane of the robot for automated deburring. Several limitations were encountered in 
this application including: the robot position loop bandpass is tuned to approximately 
3 Hz for the base, shoulder and elbow joints. Additional time delays in the communica- 
tion between the core controller and the robot controller added additional delays to the 
system, reducing the bandwidth response to 1.5 hz [39]. 

Because of the limitations mentioned above, the article concludes that: 

100 

The major factor limiting performance is reduced bandpass of the force 
control when the robot is used to apply force through tool and robot arm 
complia,nce._.... With the advent of faster computers and higher performance 
servos, it will be possible to integrate force control into an overall robot posi- 
tion control with the bandpass required for deburring and grinding In the 

interim, to obtain the active force control bandpass required for deburring, it 
is recommended that one or two high performance motion axis be added to the 
robot end effector. A high performance, 2 DOF motion control would provide 
a 10 hz bandpass with limited motion needed for high speed grinding. The 
robot would position the high speed end-effector close to the workpiece edge 
and also move the tool along the path. [39] pp. 73-78. 

Thus, it was apparent that external compensation is required for proper force control 
during robotic deburring in this example. 

Similar results were recorded by other researchers, where the robot was used to provide 
the necessary positioning for force control. Errors in the force could be partially attributed 
to the low bandwidth of the robot servos. 

In addition to the limited band width, another universal problem which hindered these 
applications was the communications problems encountered between the force controller 
and the robot controller. Many robot manufacturers have either neglected external robot 
controller communications completely, provided them at additional cost or have made 
them difficult to implement in real time. This greatly limits the ability of an internal force 
control strategy. In the next section, the operation of a single degree-of-freedom external 
force compensator will be discussed. 

External Force Compensator Description 

This section will describe a single degree-of-freedom force compensator based on the 
single degree-of-freedom position compensator described previously. The advantages of 
this method, the control architecture and various potential applications will be presented. 
It should also be pointed out that this method of external force compensation could be 
expanded to more than a single degree-of-freedom. 

The force for a positioning device is directly related to applicable flexibilities of the 
system. For the simple example given in Equation 3.12 knowing the stiffness of the system, 
k, the displacement required to produce a desired force is easily calculated. For structures 

101 

xo 

Kr 

Xr 

Mr 

Mass of 
Robot 

Ka 

Cr 

Ca 

Xwp 

Mwp 

Mass of 
Work 
PiecB 

Kwp 

Cwp 

Figure 3.16: Linear Dynamic Model of Robot and Compliant Device 

such as robots, however, obtaining the stiffness model is not a trivial matter. And because 
the robot is a dynamic structure, the stiffness model changes as the robot changes position. 

To implement a force control architecture, the stiffness (or flexibility) model could be 
implemented on a dedicated controller external the robot controller. This would require 
a data link between the two controllers so the robot position could be monitored by the 
external controller. The stiffness matrix for the robot position would then be calculated 
or retrieved from memory. If the communication capabilities of the robot controller did 
not allow the position of the robot to be transferer to the dedicated controller in real time, 
this method of force control would be unsuccessful. At this point, one probably realizes 
the similarities between force control and deflection compensation of the robot structure. 

A possible alternative to accurately modeling the robot flexibilities would be to intro- 
duce additional flexibilities to the system which are more flexible than the robot structure. 
For the simple linear system depicted in Figure 3.16, the stiffness of the workpiece, K^p 
will be assumed to be much greater than the stiffness of the robot, K,.. In essence, the 
workpiece stiffness may be considered infinite as compared to the robot flexibility. This 
assumption is accurate if a non-compliant workpiece is properly clamped to a rigid fixture. 
The additional flexibility added to the structure, li'a would then be made more flexible 
than that of the robot and would have the greatest influence on overall flexibility of the 
system. 

For the linear system found in Figure 3.16, the overaU stiffness for the springs in series, 

102 

Ko can be easily found using the following equation: 

1 

J/- 

4- _!^ J J_ 

I ft" T^ K 

(3.17) 

which simplifies to: 

KrKa + KaKwp + KwpKr ' 

Now the following assumptions are made: AV = lOA'^p and K^ - 10 AV- Substituting 
into the above equation, the resulting overall system stiffness is found in the following 

equation: 

100 ,, 
A„ = — lu (3.19) 

and Ko is found to be approximately equal to Ka- The external compliance added to the 
system becomes dominant when it is more flexible than the robot structure. This would 
eliminate the need of accurately modeling the robot flexibilities and providing commu- 
nications between the robot and force controller. However, this does lower the natural 
frequency of the system by the square root of the ratio of additional flexibilities to the 
original flexibilities of the robot. This may introduce additional stability problems to the 
control of the external compensator [43,44]. Several researchers have added compliant de- 
vices to the end of arm tooling to introduce additional flexibility to the system. Typically, 
Remote Center Compliance (RCC) devices are used for this purpose. 

Most RCC's utilize a set of elastimetric shear pads, which make the device stiff in 
compression and relatively soft in shear. These devices were originally designed for assem- 
bly applications where contact forces due to misalig-nment-alignment could be reduced. 
As an example of a particular device, the manufacturer [45] lists the following following 
specifications: 

• lateral stiffness - 42.0 N/mm (241 lb/in) 

• rotational stiffness - 230 N-mm/mrad (2030 in-lb/rad) 

• axial stiffness - 1800 N/mm (10720 lb/in) 

• torsional stiffness - 25.0 N-mm/mrad (221 in-lb/rad) 

103 

The lateral stiffness of the RCC is approximately ten times more flexible than that 
of the Cincinnati Milacron T3-776 robot for out-of-plane motion. Thus, for most robot 
positions the dominant flexibilities of the system would be due to the RCC. The flexibility 
of the RCC could be easily modeled and used in the force control algorithm. 

Internal force control of robots utilize compliant devices for an additional reason, the 
resolution of the robot is too coarse for the small incremental changes in force required in 
some applications. For the GE P50, the robot has a resolution of 0.005 inch (.127 mm) 
in each axis and a stiffness of 50 lb/in (8670 N/m), which results in an incremental force 
command of 0.25 to 0.40 lb (1.12 to 1.78 N). It is felt that the resolution stated by Haefner 
[39] is somewhat optimistic, which would reduce the force resolution. The RCC reduces 
the stiffness by a factor of 5, which provides an the incremental force command of 0.07 lb 
(0.31 N). 

With an externally servoed device, the resolution (force or position) at the end effector 
may be increased by one to two orders of magnitude over the typical resolution of the robot 
end effector. For example, the external positioning device developed for the position 
compensation of the robot described earlier, a resolution of 0.0001 inch (0.0025 mm) 
was theoretically possible, with a more realistic capability of 0.0005 inch (0.013 mm). 
Thus, a compliant end effector with a flexibility of 50 lb/in and a positioning device with 
0.0005 inch (0.013 mm) resolution located at the end effector, the force resolution could 
be improved to 0.025 lb (0.11 N), an increase of one order of magnitude over the original 
GE P50 robot system described above. 

In a combined package, Instrumented Remote Center of Compliance devices (IRCC) 
provide both passive compliance needed for improved force control and active sensing 
which could eliminate the need of having a wrist mounted force sensor. Typically IRCC 
are used for assembly operations, but would be useful for force control applications with 
relatively low force requirements. The IRCC devices have been used for adaptive control 
in real time continuous servo loop systems as a feedback element. The compliance of the 
IRCC tends to increase the loop stabihty, permitting higher feedback gains [46]. 

Mounting 
Tool 
Plate BL 

(1) (2) 

Spr ings 

\ \ 

(1) Top Plate 

(2) Bottom 
Plate 

Y Displaosment 
Probe 

X DispUceflQnt 
Probe 

104 

Figure 3.17: Two Degree- Of- Freedom Instrumented Compliant Device 

For typical metal removal operations, the resulting forces are resolved into two direc- 
tions, normal to the cut and tangential to the cut. A two degree-of- freedom force sensor 
with adjustable compliance could be used instead of the four to six degrees-of-freedom 
of typical IRCCs proposed. The orientation of the two degrees-of-freedom of the force 
sensor would be aligned parallel to normal and tangential forces produced by the cutting 
operation. Thus, the unnecessary complexity and poor reliability of complex six degree- 
of-freedom force measuring devices would be eliminated. This two degree-of- freedom, 
compliant force measuring device would be used in conjunction with a high resolution 
active end-effector with one or two servo driven axes. 

The high resolution positioning device could be located between the wrist flange of the 
robot and the instrumented compliant device. A two degree-of-freedom compliant device 
was designed using two orthogonal sets of leaf springs. This design retains high stiffness 
in the remaining four degrees-of-freedom. By varying the length, width or thickness of 
the springs, the flexibility coefficients could be easily changed. Figure 3.17 depicts the 
basic design of the device. Two orthogonally mounted displacements devices would be 
used to measure the displacement of the tool mounting plate relative to the bottom plate, 
which is mounted to the wrist flange of the robot. Sensitivity of a typical displacement 
transducer is 0.0001 inch (2.5 um) in translation, with a range of -f /- 0.1 in (2.5 mm). If 

105 

a spring with 240 lb/in (40 N/mm) were used, the force resolution of the device would be 
0.024 lb (0.01 N). This would provide a flexibility of approximately 10 times the maximum 
flexibility of the robot. This would make the flexibility of the compliant device dominant, 
thus eliminating the need of modeling the robot flexibilities. However, the device would 
be limited to externally applied forces of 24 lb (107 N), adequate for the forces produced 
during edge milUng, light grinding or deburring. 

This device has several advantages over other commercially available IRCC's, the com- 
pliance or flexibility can be easily varied by changing the length, width or thickness of the 
springs, the displacements and forces are uncoupled in the two directions of measurement, 
the device would be inexpensive to manufacture and the analog output of the transducer 
allows true real time operation without any additional digital components. 

This system incorporating the resolution positioning device and IRCC, could be com- 
pletely self-contained and adaptable to a wide variety of industrial robots. Highly resolved 
force control would be available without any previous knowledge of the robot character- 
istics, including: structural deformation information, control architecture, and software 
capabilities. 

Continued Work In External Compensation 

Recently, the need for a multiple degree-of-freedom active compensator became appar- 
ent for more complicated tasks, including insertion tasks. For the square peg-in-the-hole 
insertion task, there are five force constraints and a single degree-of-freedom in position, 
ie. in and out of the hole. Thus for this task, a five degree-of-freedom active device was 
considered. 

Some general considerations of this device included the ability to provide passive com- 
pliance (have some specified structural flexibility), internal force measuring ability, com- 
pact design and high bandwidth. This device would utilize a dedicated controller based 
on an in-expensive PC device. Prior to the mating operation, the end-effector would be 
under position control. After the mating is completed, the system would be under pure 

\. 

106 

Robot Mounting 
Plate 

Tool Mounting 
Plate 

Tool Mounting 
Plate 

Robot Mounting 
Plate 

Tliis Symbol is 

Used To Represent 

Hool^e Joints 

, Tool Mounting 
Plate 

Figure 3.18: Five Degree-Of-Freedom Active Compensator 

force control. During the actual mating operation, the compensator would utilize both 
position and force information. This period of combined force/position operation will be 
discussed in detail shortly. 

The kinematic design for this device is quite unique. It involves a parallel kinematic 
structure consisting of five prismatic links which are servo controlled. Figure 3.18 shows the 
basic design of the structure. An orthogonal pair of parallelograms will be used to provide 
almost completely uncoupled motion of the output plate, in Cartesian coordinates. This 
mechanism provides a limited range of motion in all directions except rotations about 
the Z axis. The Stewart Platform is a similar device where it uses parallel, prismatic 
links and provides a limited motion in six degrees-of- freedom. However, motions of the 

107 

JDisplacement 

Measuring 

Device 

c^^-^VV 

Adjustable 
Spring 

Gear 

Reducer 

M\\\\\\\\\\\\\\ \ 

\ \\\^\\\\^^''\^\ \ 

Lead-Nut 
Screw 

Motor 

Thrust Bearing 

Figure 3.19: Schematic Representation of the Prismatic Linkages For the Five De- 
gree-Of-Freedom Compensator 

Stewart Platform use highly coupled, coordinated motion between the links, requiring 
time consuming transformations for the desired motion of the output plate. Additionally, 
one or more of the active links of the five degree-of-freedom device could be replaced with 
passive links to provide a highbred active/passive compensator. 

Figure 3.19 shows the schematic representation of the active prismatic link. It incor- 
porates a lead-nut screw to convert the rotary motion of the servo to the desired linear 
motion of the prismatic link. In addition to the active positioning of the lead-nut screw, a 
spring is also included in series to provide passive compliance. By knowing the stiffness of 
the spring, and measuring its deflection, the force applied at that link would be accurately 
known. This would provide high resolution force control, an internal force measuring 
system and improved system stability. This setup is described as a hybrid compliance 
(both active and passive) device. The spring could be replaced with a rigid link to provide 
strictly active compensation. The lead-nut screw could be fixed so that the link provides 
only passive compliance. Additionally, the hybrid link could be completely replaced by a 
rigid link for other applications. 

As mentioned previously, prior to the the actual insertion, the active compensator 
will be position controlled, using position information provided by external means, ie. a 
real time, target tracking vision system. After the insertion is completed, the system is 
completely force controlled. The control scheme for this external device would be very 
similar to the control diagram seen in Figure 3.15. Remember that during force control. 

108 

Pos i t i on 
Cont rol 

Transi t ion 
Period 

Force 
Cont ro 1 

Figure 3.20: Transition Between Position and Force Control 

the force gain matrix, Gi is the identity matrix and the position gain matrix, G2 is zero, 
and the opposite is true for position control. But what happens during the transition 
period between position and force control? Figure 3.20 illustrates this transition period. 
This area of research is currently under investigation by the author through simulation. 
A single degree-of-freedom servo mechanism will be used to demonstrate the resulting 
control scheme. 

External active compensation provides many advantages over traditional compensation 
techniques. This device, if it lives up to its expectations will provide: position or force 
compensation, fast response, high resolution internal sensing, and both passive and active 
compliance for multiple degrees-of-freedom. 

CHAPTER 4 
FLEXIBILITY COMPENSATION 

In this section, a brief literary review of flexibility modeling and compensation tech- 
niques will be presented. Then the task of actually compensating for the deflections due 
to applied loads will be discussed. The compensation task is divided into four sections: 

1. Identifying the flexible elements in the robot structure and quantifying their flexi- 
bilities. 

2. Formulating the resulting flexibilities at the tool as a function of position of the tool 
in the workspace of the robot. 

3. Measuring the cutting force and calculating the deflections at the tool. 

4. Generating commands for a corrective motion at the compensator. 

The first two tasks were accomplished by Stern [8] and they will be discussed to provide 
a complete overview to the compensation technique. The second two tasks were performed 
during the course of this research and will also be discussed. Finally, results of both static 
and dynamic tests will be presented. 

Flexibility Modeling and Compensation Review 

In many robotic applications, significant external loads are present which may produce 
errors in position and orientation at the end effector. In general, as the precision, load, 
or load variation increases, the value of the robot application also increases. This is 
because skilled workers are often replaced in these applications which include the following 
manufacturing areas: assembling, drilling, routing, polishing, deburring, polishing and 
edge milhng. 

Typical robot arms exhibit a high degree of flexibility outside of their positional control 
loop. Thus large deformations occur, resulting in reduced precision when external loads 

109 

110 

are present. These errors due to applied loads are typically greater than the errors due to 
geometric accuracy errors. Full rated loads may cause deformations of 10 to 20 times the 
stated repeatability of the system, Sklar [9]. Obviously, to achieve the required precision 
while externally applied loads are present, these deformations must be compensated for. 
There are currently three general techniques which can be employed to eliminate the 
deformation errors. The first method involves using the familiar but expensive rigid tem- 
plate technique, which was described in the introduction. The second technique incorpo- 
rates various sensors which directly or indirectly measure the displacement error caused 
by the robot deflections. For example, a vision system could directly track the desired 
path which was inscribed on the workpiece. Deviations from the desired path would result 
in error commands, which drive the deflection compensator. 

The third technique used to detect deformation errors involves modeling the flexibilities 
of the manipulator and predicting the deflection errors. For some applications, where the 
external loads are known in advance, the displacement error can be predicted and a feed 
forward compensation technique can be used. In other cases, where the applied loads 
are not known, the external forces must be measured in real time and using the flexibility 
model, the deflections would again be estimated and compensated for in a feedback control 
method. 

The primary advantages of using this third method are: it is a simple and less expensive 
system, it has the ability to predict ahead of time the deflections due to known loads and 
this system could be easily moved to robots of the same type. 

Several methods of modeling robot structures are currently being employed including: 
finite element analysis of structures, and physical modeling of actual robots, using both 
static modeling methods and dynamic modeling methods. In most cases, the flexibility 
of the robot manipulator is represented by a compliance or flexibility matrix relating the 
6 components of force to 6 components of deflection. And because the flexibilities of 
the manipulator change as the robot changes position, the flexibility matrix is position 
dependant. 

Ill 

Research in the area of dynamic analysis of planar mechanisms, and the extension to 
spatial mechanisms has been a popular topic for quite some time. Unfortunately, little 
effort has been placed on the actual identification of flexibility parameters needed for 
deflection compensation of real on-line robots. The majority of the work is focused on the 
form of the models and dynamic analysis formulations. 

Because much of the past research on the dynamic analysis of flexible mechanisms is 
helpful for model identification, a brief review will be provided here. Research in the area 
of flexible systems began with simple planar mechanisms. Winfrey [47] has developed a 
complete vibrational analysis and dynamic model of linkages composed entirely of elastic 
links. This technique has been simplified by Erdman and Sandor [48] in a technique 
identified as "Kineto-Elastatic Analysis". This is a quasi-static approach where the inertial 
loads, in a planar linkage, are considered as applied loads acting on a fixed structure. 
Dubowsky and Gardner [49] have developed a similar model but include non-linear effects 
such as joint backlash. 

The dynamic analysis for both spatial mechanisms and manipulators has been con- 
sidered in the literature. Book [50] was one of the first researchers to provide a clear 
dynamic model of an open link chain containing flexible links. A complete vibrational 
model, considering loads applied at the end-effector only, was presented. This work iden- 
tified distinct deflection coordinates for each link, essential for identifying individual joint 
flexibilities from global flexibilities. Huston and Kelly [51] have extended this technique 
through the use of the D'Alembert force principal to include the inertial load effects acting 
on each link. 

Dubowsky and Sunada [52] developed an extensive formulation which actually pre- 
dicts the flexibility parameters based on finite element methods. Other researchers have 
also considered this approach. Thompson and Sung [53] developed a finite element for 
planar linkages which includes non-linear modeling of the link deformations. However, for 
actual industrial robot systems, this becomes extremely difficult because the links are not 
composed of simple 'laboratory' link geometries. Additionally, the computational effort 

112 

becomes overwhelming. 

Recently, two researchers actually modeled identical robots, two Cincinnati Milacron 
T3-776 robots, using two dissimilar techniques. First, Sklar [9] used static measurements 
to identify both the global flexibilities (at the end-effector) of the robot and the local 
flexibilities at each link. This was done by making static measurements of the robot 
in a variety of positions and curve fitting the data to provide the necessary flexibility 
parameters. Second, Stern [8] used dynamic methods to model the robot. By applying 
impulses to the structure and measuring the dynamic response, the spring-mass model 
of the robot was established. The respective local flexibilities were within 20 percent of 
each other for the two studies. With this information, both local and global flexibilities 
were developed. The results of the dynamic modeling method were used in this flexibility 
compensation and the model will be explained in the next section. 

Not only are the determination of flexibility parameters ignored by many researchers, so 
is the compensation for eliminating deformations at the end-effector. Bagci [54] developed 
a quasi-static model which uses an iterative compensation algorithm providing joint angle 
corrections to compensate for end-effector deformations. Using the system joint actuators 
for the required compensation limits the response time to the inherent capabilities of 
the robot. Thus a few researchers have considered active high speed external devices 
with higher bandwidths to provide the necessary compensation. Zalucky and Hardt [55] 
have developed a specialized robot link mechanism which actually determines the local 
deflection of a specific link in the robot and compensates for the deflection using a servo- 
driven actuator within the link mechanism. Thus local deflections (deflections occurring 
at the individual links) are compensated for directly. 

Other researchers have developed compensators at the end of the manipulator, provid- 
ing active end-effectors. These include the single degree-of-freedom device developed for 
edge milling by Tlusty and Wegerif [32] and the two degree-of-freedom device by Tilley, 
Cannon and Kraft [26] for force control. The two degree-of-freedom device used a five-bar 
mechanism at the end of a flexible, single degree-of-freedom manipulator. This device was 

113 

developed to provide force control at the end-effector, but it may also be used to provide 
positional compensation as well. 

Various applications requiring some type of flexibility compensation include the control 
of very flexible manipulators. Typical applications for these devices include underwater 
and zero gravity environments. Recently, much research has been devoted to the control 
of these flexible manipulators, which are really a special and limited type of manipulator. 
The models of these flexible manipulators have structural frequencies of approximately 
1 Hz, as compared to typical industrial robots where the lowest structural frequency is 
approximately 10 Hz. Thus, the standard industrial robot is approximately 100 times as 
stiff as the flexible manipulator. With these great flexibilities encountered in the flexible 
manipulator, it is obvious that some type of compensation is required to provide the 
necessary accuracy at the end-effector. 

Little research exists in the positional compensation of these large devices. Tilley and 
Cannon [26] demonstrated the great advantage in using an active compensator to provide 
accurate force control of a flexible mechanism, and it is apparent that similar techniques 
could be imposed to provide accurate position control as well. 

Active compensation at the end-effector has been expanded to provide a complete 6 
degree-of-freedom "micro-manipulator" device capable of providing complete compensa- 
tion for end-effector deformations [31]. Compensation achieved through external devices 
offers several signiflcant advantages over compensation by robot joints: 

• The active compensator can be designed to have a higher bandwidth than the robot 
actuators. 

• The active compensator can be designed to have better resolution than that of the 
robot. 

• An active end-effector is a stand alone device and could be attached to any robot, 
given the input control. 

114 
Dynamic Modeling of T3-776 Robot 

In this section, a synopsis of the dynamic modeling done by Stern [8] will be presented. 
By providing a dynamic model of the robot, the flexibility matrix of the robot could be 
extracted and be used to provide compensation due to deflections of the robot structure. 

The dynamic measurements of the robot were arranged to obtain a dynamic model of 
the structure as an assembly of springs, masses and dampers as they respond to external 
forces. Modal analysis techniques were used to derive this dynamic model of the robot. 
Modal analysis describes the sum of motions of a linearly elastic system which exhibits a 
characteristic pattern or shape of deformation. The amplitude of the oscillatory motion of 
each vibrational mode is defined by a unique set of parameters: mass, stiffness, damping 
and time varying forces which induce the motion. 

For each mode of vibration, the amplitudes of the motion for each point in the structure 
can be expressed relative to a single point. This relationship of the relative amplitudes 
of motion for each point in the structure is known as a mode shape. The mode shape 
describes the shape of the characteristic deformation pattern exhibited by each mode of 
vibration [8]. 

The motion of an n degree-of-freedom system is described by a set of n ordinary 
differential equations of the second order, where n describes the number of vibrational 
modes of the structure. .For the simple undamped case, the equations of motion can be 
written as: 

[M]{x} + [K]{x} = {F} (4.1) 

where 

[M] - mass matrix 

[K] - stiffness matrix 

{x} - acceleration in local coordinates 

{x} - displacement in local coordinates 

{F} - applied force in local coordinates 

imtm^r^,i<^i*,-i,tn*]a^s-.mi*^'i 

115 
The harmonic equation of motion during free vibration is represented as: 

-u'[M]{x} + [K]{x} = {0} (4.2) 

The non-trivial solution to the above equation is known as the eigenvalue problem and 
can only be solved if the characteristic determinant 

|[/i']-u;^[M]| = (4.3) 

vanishes. The characteristic equation is obtained by expanding the determinant to form 
an n order algebraic expression in u"^, where the n roots (eigenvalues) are denoted 
Ui,U2, ...ji^n- The positive square roots of tlie eigenvalues correspond to the undamped 
natural frequency of the system [8]. 

For each natural frequency w,-, a non-trivial vector solution of equation 4.2 yields an 
eigenvector pi corresponding to each mode of vibration. Each of these vectors is called 
a modal vector or mode shape. Normalizing these n mode shapes to a given reference 
and assembling them into a square matrix results in the formation of the modal matrix 
[P]. By pre- and post-multiplying the mass matrix [M] by the modal matrix, the diagonal 
modal mass matrix [Mq] is produced. In a similar fashion, the modal stiffness matrix [Kg] 
is produced. The excitation forces {F} are transformed to modal coordinated {R} also. 

[Mq] = [P]^[M][P] (4.4) 

[iQ = [pfmip] (4.5) 

{R} = {Ff[P] (4.6) 

Thus equation 4.2 can be rewritten as: 

{-u'[Mq] + [lQ){q} = {R} (4.7) 

Solving for the vibration in any one of the modal coordinates qi: 

Ti 

ki - ufrrii 
where 

(4.8) 

116 
r,- - force applied to the i^^ modal coordinate 

ki - i^^ element on the diagonal of [Kg] corresponding to the modal stiffness of the i^'^ 
mode of vibration 

rrii - i^^ element on the diagonal of [Mq] corresponding to the modal mass of the i*'* mode 
of vibration 

Ui - the natural frequency of the i mode of vibration 

The vibration of the system can be regarded as the superposition, or linear sum, of 
the n nodes of vibration: ■♦ 

n 

W^E^'fe} (4-9) 

t"=i 

These equations can be further expanded to include both proportionally damped and 
unproportionally damped vibration. This is fully explained in [8]. 

The dynamic measurements of the robot structure were done in three groups: 

1. Measurements in the X-Z plane of the structure or in-the-plane motions, not includ- 
ing the wrist. 

2. Measurements in the Y direction, perpendicular to the X-Z plane or out-of-plane 
motions, not including the wrist. 

3. Measurements of the wrist for motions in X,Y and Z directions. 

Figure 4.1 shows the T3-776 robot in the X-Z plane and the various point of mea- 
surements. These points were used to develop the modal model or dynamic model of the 
robot. The direct transfer function was obtained by applying an impulse force in the Z 
direction at coordinate 4. The direct transfer function is shown in Figure 4.2 Because 
the modes are uncoupled, they can be treated as independent and the equation for single 
degree-of-freedom damped system can be used to provide the system parameters. The 

117 

Figure 4.1: Drawing of tlie T3-776 Robot and the Various Points of Measurement (Adapted 
from [15]) 

in/sec 

Ibf 

Figure 4.2: Direct Transfer Function of In Plane Motion of T.3-776 Robot (Adapted from 
[15]) 

118 

following equation is the generalized form of a single degree-of- freedom damped system 
(spring, mass, dashpot): 

X = ^'^ (4.10) 

where 

X - the magnitude of the displacement ra - the mass of the system 

F - the applied force in the x direction k - the spring rate of the system 

u - the forcing frequency C, - the damping ratio of the system 
Lj-n - the systems natural frequency 

The transfer function was curve fitted using a modal analyzer and the parameters for 
each of the four modes are listed below. 

Modal Parameters Of Direct Transfer Function 

Mode f (Hz) k (N/m) m (kg) C (%) 

1 10.09 0.97 *10^ 241 1.38 

2 24.83 1.34 +10^ 550 3.06 

3 34.24 1.05 *10^ 22704 5.95 

4 40.64 3.57 +10^ 54882 5.54 

The GenRad dynamic analyzer can be used to animate the various modes of vibra- 
tion for the X-Z plane and they are depicted in Figure 4.3. These modes are associated 
with four structural degrees-of-freedom and they have led to a planar model depicted in 
Figure 4.4. The modal parameters must be converted into local coordinates to be use- 
ful, so the methods of transforming modal to local parameters as described earlier were 
invoked. Four concentrated flexibilities (springs) were located, one in each leadscrew nut 
transmissions {ki and k2) and the others in the foundation of the robot (Ajs and ^-4). 
Four concentrated masses were also identified and they are labeled mi through m^. The 
following table provides the local springs and masses for the planar system. 

119 

10.09 Hz 

2'}. 83 Hz 

34.21 Hz 

40.64 Hz 

Figure 4.3: Mode Shapes of the Basic Structure in the X-Z Plane (Adapted from [15]) 

HI M2 M3 

OOi o 

Figure 4.4: Model Corresponding to the Modes in the X-Z Plane (Adapted from [15]) 

-■fc;*— CT — « .-ii"— " - < ; -— ir ■ 

120 

Figure 4.5: Model Showing All the Local Springs and Masses (Adapted from [15]) 

Local Stiffnesses And Masses 

k(N/m) 

m(kg) 

ki = 5.56 *10^ mi = 182 

k2 = 7.77 +10^ ms = 94 

^3 = 3.49 +10^ ms = 156 

k^ = 1.44 *10® m4 = 2408 

The location and magnitude of these masses and springs required a great deal of 
modeling skills and trial and error before they were quite accurate. But this should give 
a basic understanding of how these local flexibility parameters were derived. 

In a similar fashion, the out of plane dynamics and finally the wrist dynamics were 
measured and modeled. A model showing the stiffnesses of the local springs, and local 
masses is presented in Figure 4.5. The torsional springs ks and kg appear in the out-of- 
plane modes. The former one is a combination of bearing deformations in the mounting 
of the table and of the base of the housing. The latter one is due to the flexibilities of 
the bearing in the elbow joint axis. The springs k-, kg and kg are due to the torsional 
flexibilities of the wrist torque tubes and coincide with the kinematic freedoms of the 
wrist. The identified values of the springs k^ through kg are: 

121 

Local Stiffnesses ^5 Through kg 

Nm/rad 
ks = 3.05 *10^ A;6 = 1.05 *10^ 
kv = 6.90 tlO'* ks = 2.03 +10'* 
kg = 1.37 +10^ 

In summary, the modal parameters as well as the mode shapes are determined by 
comparing the direct and cross transfer functions measured at various locations of the 
structure. Transfer functions are made by exciting the structure with an instrumented 
impact hammer and measuring the response of the structure at various locations producing 
both direct transfer and cross transfer functions. With the modal mass and stiffness matrix 
known, the local masses and stiffnesses could be solved for. With the local flexibilities 
known to within 5%, the global flexibilities could then be calculated for any given robot 
position. 

Position Dependant Global Flexibilities 

To accurately compensate for the structural flexibilities of the robot, the modeled 
local flexibilities are transformed into a more convenient coordinate system. In essence, 
flexibilities of both the structure (base, shoulder and elbow) and the wrist are transformed 
to wrist coordinates. The forces measured at the end effector are transformed to wrist 
coordinates also. The transformed flexibilities are multiplied by the transformed forces 
and a displacement in the wrist coordinates are produced. Finally, the displacements in 
the wrist coordinates are back transformed into the tool coordinates, and the displacement 
in the tool coordinates are used to control the compensator. Stern [8] has detailed this 
procedure and a brief synopsis will be presented here. 

The geometric configuration of the robot is defined by the position and orientation of 
the tool in space. The position of the tool is expressed in global Cartesian coordinates 
X, Y and Z. The origin of the global reference frame is fixed at the intersection of the 
first and second joints of the robot. The orientation of the tool is referenced to the global 
system by the orientation space coordinates D, E and R (yaw, pitch and roll). 

122 

Figure 4.6: The Four Coordinate Systems in Robot Model (Adapted from [15]) 

Four coordinate systems were used to define tire configuration of tire robot structure, as 
depicted in Figure 4.6. As mentioned previously, the global reference frame (g) is located 
at the intersection of the first two joints. The wrist coordinate system (w) is located at the 
center of the three revolute wrist. The plate coordinate system (p) is located at the tool 
mounting flange, and the tool coordinate system (t) is located at the end of the tool. The 
plate and tool coordinate systems have the same orientation with a fixed translation. The 
force sensor is also located at the tool mounting flange and it utilizes the plate coordinate 
reference frame. 

The deflections of the robot are divided into two segments: those deflections due to 
the robot structure and those deflections due to wrist deflections. First, the deflections of 
the robot structure will be explained. 

The location of the tool end point is always known by the robot controller in global 
coordinates {T}g, as the point in space which must be accurately controlled. There is a 
fixed vector between the tool tip and the wrist center and this is known in tool coordinates 
as {DW}t. By transforming the vector {DW}t into global coordinates {DW}g, the wrist 
center can be specified. The transformation is found in the following equation: 

{DW}g = [RE][RD][RR]{DW}t 

(4.11) 

123 

Global 

Coordi nate 

System 

Wrist 
Coo r dina te 
^ System 

Tool 

Coo rd i nate 

System 

Figure 4.7: Location of Wrist Center in Global Coordinates 

Each rotation matrix, [R*] is defined by the tool orientation description: yaw (E), pitch 
(D), roll (R). Knowing the vector {DW}g and the tool end point location in global coor- 
dinates {T}g, the location of the wrist center in global coordinates {DW}g can be found 
using simple vector addition: 

{W}, - {T}g + {DW}, 

(4.12) 

This is illustrated in Figure 4.7. In a similar manner, the global position of the tool 
mounting plate {P}g may also be determined. Once the location of the wrist is defined, 
the geometry is solved through a closed form solution. The locations of the eleven points 
used to define the robot model seen in Figure 4.1, are calculated. The flexibilities of the 
robot structure are then predicted using the local flexibility models. These flexibilities are 
expressed in the wrist coordinates by: 

[FLEXU = [RF]- 

FlexX 

FlexY 
FlexY 

[RF]-' 

(4.1.3) 

where [RF] is the rotation of the forearm relative to the X axis as measured about the 

124 

Y axis. It is important to note that the planar flexibilities of the robot (Flex X and 
Flex Y) are predicted based only on the foundation flexibilities denoted A'3 and K4 in 
Figure 4.4. The flexibilities of shoulder and elbow are compensated for over time due to 
position feedback mechanism of these joints. This feedback compensation will be discussed 
in detail later. 

By transforming the forces measured at the plate {F}p back to the wrist coordinate 
system, the displacement of the structure at the wrist can be calculated. The following 
transformation is used to provide the forces at the wrist: 

{F}^ = [RF][RE][RD][RR]{F},{F}^ = [Rpw]{F}p (4.14) 

The matrix [Rpw] provides transfomiations from the plate to wrist coordinates. The 
displacement of the wrist center is calculated relative to the wrist coordinate system by 
the following equation: 

{dW:c}w = [FLEX]^{F}^ (4.15) 

Next, the flexibilities of the wrist are calculated. The moments about the axes of 
the wrist coordinate system are determined by the vector cross product of {Rwp}^^; (the 
displacement between the plate and the wrist in wrist coordinates) and the measured 
forces represented in the wrist coordinates, {F}^: 

{M,} = {Rwp}^ X {F}^ (4.16) 

These moments are then transformed by the matrix [Ml] into moments about the indi- 
vidual wrist axes by: 

{MR,} = [M1]{M^} (4.17) 

The moments about each axis in the wrist is denoted {A4Ri}. The resulting rotations 
(roll) of each revolute is determined by the identified torsional spring rates of the wrist 
model: 

{ROLL,} = i^^ (4.18) 

125 

The rotation about the wrist axes are then represented as equivalent rotations about the 
wrist coordinate axes by the following transformation: 

{ROLL^} = [MT]{ROLLi} (4.19) 

where {ROLL^;} denotes the rotations about the wrist coordinate system. The displace- 
ment of the tool relative to the wrist can now be determined, knowing the vector between 
the wrist center and the tool end-point, {Rwt}. By cross multiplying the vectors {ROLL:^} 
and {Rwt} the resulting vector is the displacement of the tool relative to the wrist: 

{dT^}u, = {Rwt}X{ROLL^} (4.20) 

The total predicted displacement of the tool in wrist coordinates is expressed as the sum 
of the displacement of the wrist due to the robot structure {dT^^}.^ and the displacement 
of the tool relative to the wrist center, {dW^jiu due to the wrist flexibilities: 

{DT^}^ = {dW^}^ + {dT^}^ (4.21) 

Finally, the displacement is expressed in the tool coordinate system through a series 
of rotations opposite of [Rpw], otherwise known as [Rwp]: 

{DT^}p = [Rwp]{DT,U (4.22) 

For the predetermined paths of the robot, much of the matrix manipulations can be 
done before they are required and stored. The equation for computing deflections at the 
tool is written symbolically as: 

{DT,}^ = [Rwp]{[FLEX]^ + [D E F LU}[Rpw]{Fp} (4.2-3) 

where the [DEFL]^ denotes the flexibilities due to the wrist. A FORTRAN program 
similar to this was used to calculate the deflections at the tool. The methodology of 
computing the deflections of the robot at the tool given the local flexibilities of the robot 
structure and wrist was presented in this section. Stern [8] provides a detailed account 
of this technique. The software used to predict the position dependant flexibilities of the 
robot was derived from his work. 

, rfi»- r " 1 r !■ nn i »Miiiii Ti 

126 

C 

Q) 
O 

(0 

iH 

a 
en 

-H 

D 

O 
C 

-H 

n 
I 

o 

Time (second) 

Figure 4.8: Transient Displacement in Z at Point 1 (Adapted from [15]) 

Joint Flexibilities 

It should be noted here that a majority of the measured flexibilities are due to the 
flexibilities in the joint transmissions and drive systems. Little flexibility of current indus- 
trial robots is due to the deflection of the actual links. As mentioned previously in this 
section, the flexibilities of the shoulder and elbow transmissions were not included in the 
flexibility model of the robot structure. This is because these flexibilities are included in 
the positional control loop of those joints. 

Figure 4.8 shows the transient displacement of the tool mounting plate in the Z direc- 
tion after a weight of 80 pounds (312 N), suspended on the end effector was "suddenly" 
lifted. This was not an ideal step input as the force release happened over a finite period 
of time. The displacement of the end-effector was measured with a capacitance probe 
attached to a rigid frame. It is seen that first a deflection of 0.05 inch (1.25 mm) occurs 
in 0.160 sec. By then the servomotor is commanded by the error detected by the resolvers 
at the shoulder and elbow, and starts to eliminate the error. The system overshoots, and 
after approximately 2 sec, the error is eliminated. Superimposed on this motion is the 
slowly decaying 10 Hz vibration of the first X-Z mode of the structure. 

Two observations can be made from this demonstration. First, the servo is able to 

127 

compensate well for the externally applied forces after a period of two seconds. The 
second observation is that the reaction of the robot is too slow to prevent the deflection 
from occuring. It is apparent that the flexibilities of the shoulder and elbow joints are 
contained within their respective positional control loop because after the two second time 
period, the robot returns to its initial position. If these flexibilities were not included in 
the control loop of these two joints, then a positional displacement error would result after 
the motion of robot damped out. From this information, a model of the servos can be 
developed. 

For simplicity, just the model of the shoulder will be presented here. The model in- 
cludes: the servomotor and resolver, the lead nut screw transmission and the flexibilities 
associated with the transmission. The flexibilities of the lead nut screw are shown pic- 
torially in Figure 4.9 a). The command input Ycom is compared to the actual position 
sensed by the encoder and the amplified error signal is used to drive the servomotor. The 
servomotor with a transmission ratio r moves by X and then drives the spring/dashpot of 
the lead nut screw transmission assembly. The mass m is then displaced by F, Figure 4.9 
b). A simplified block diagram of the system is shown in Figure 4.9 c). The alternative 
feedback A would correspond to those servos with external flexibilities, such as those found 
in the wrist. The alternative feedback system, B corresponds to those servos with internal 
flexibilities, ie. the base, shoulder and elbow. 

By including those flexibilities in the positional loop, the servos may automatically 
eliminate the positional errors over time. However, any external flexibilities (feedback al- 
ternative A) will not be eliminated unless some external compensation means is employed. 
The system in Figure 4.9 was simulated and the results are given in Figure 4.10 a) The 
same system depicted in Figure 4.10 a) was then modified to use the alternative feedback 
A and simulated and the results are shown in Figure 4.10 b). The deflections resulting 
from a constantly applied force are never eliminated over time in this case. Those deflec- 
tions due to the flexibilities not included in the servo positional control loop are the ones 
requiring attention and elimination with external compensation. 

128 

servomotor 

a) 

b) 

' com 

Discr . 
^ Amp . 

MOTOR 

c) 

a b 

K 

1 + xs 

alt A 

cs + k 

ms +cs+k 

v.F 

alt B 

Figure 4.9: Model of the Servomeclianism with Internal/External Flexibilities (Adapted 
from [32]) 

CJ o 

>- 

, f~^ . 

>-. 

filit^Wi 

0.00 J, 00 ^2.00 3.00 4.00 0. DO J. 00 2.00 3.00 4. 

00 

Figure 4.10: Simulation of a) Internal and b) External Flexibilities (Adapted from [15]) 

■)^g>-w^YanaBH4 j ■■■■J i^jig^raSBWUi 

129 

Cutting Mechanics for Edge Milling 

In this section, a brief introduction to cutting mechanics will be presented, followed 
by the single degree-of- freedom compensation methodology imposed. For the edge milUng 
task described by the initial request of the Office of Naval Research, light machining of 
sheet aluminum components was to be performed. During the milUng of these components, 
two types of variable forces are produced, the first is the periodically variable component 
due to the rotation of the cutter, and the second is variation of the average force com- 
ponent. The variation of the average force is due to the changing width of the metal to 
be removed. Measurements of the forces are presented and detailed characteristics are 
simulated. 

Traditionally, this milling operation is performed by high speed routers using two fluted 
end mills. These routers operate at high speed (18,000 RPM is typical). With a two fluted 
end mill, this produces a tooth frequency of 600 Hz: 

_ ^8, 000 rev /min X 2 teeth/ rev 
QO secjmin 

This is a very high frequency with respect to the natural frequencies of the robot structure 

which were found to be less than 40 Hz. Therefore the vibration of the robot due to the 

high frequency of the end mill is very small. 

The typical specifications for this application are: end mill with a diameter d = 0.375 

to 0.5 inch (9.53 to 12.7 mm), aluminum sheet metal with thickness t = 0.1 to 0.2 inch 

(2.5 to 5.1 mm), and feedrates of 10 to 100 inch/min (0.25 to 2.5 m/min). This results in 

an average cutting force in the range of 5 to 100 lbs (22.3 to 445 N), where the cutting 

force is proportional to the metal removal rate (MMR). The cutting force can be found 

by the following equation: 

Favg cc Kb *W *D*Fr = Kb * MMR (4.25) 

where 
Favg - the average cutting force 

Head 
Stock 

Pnuematic 
Router ■^ 

Workpiece- 

Table 
Dynamometer 

x\W' 

n n 

TI 

Z2Z 

\\\V-vsS\\\\\\v--.\\\\\\- 

Three Axes Milling Machine 

130 

Figure 4.11: Experimental Set-Up to Measure Cutting Forces 

Kb - cutting stiffness of material 

W - width of cut 

D - depth of cut 

Fr - feedrate of tool 

MRR - Metal Removal Rate 

Prior to performing actual robotic milling experiments, equivalent cutting tests were 
performed on a large three axis vertical milhng machine. A small high-speed pneumatic 
router was attached to the headstock of the milhng machine, and the aluminum work piece 
was attached to a high quality three degree-of- freedom table dynamometer, Figure 4.11. 
The workpiece was a 0.1875 inch (4.77 mm) thick sheet of aluminum, grade 7075. The 
pneumatic spindle carried a 0.375 inch (9.53 mm) diameter, two fluted router. The spindle 
provided 9000 RPM output under load, corresponding to a tooth frequency of 300 Hz. A 
i immersion down milhng cut illustrated in Figure 4.12 was made, with a feedrate of 
10 in/min (.25 M/min). A time record of the force in the Y direction, Fy was recorded 
and is shown in Figure 4.13 a). The forces generated as the teeth contact the workpiece 
are clearly visible in Figure 4.13 a). The spectrum of the cutting forces is shown in 

131 

Figure 4.12: Forces Due to | Immersion Down Milling (Adapted from [32]) 

Force 

40- 

20- 

Ibf 

-20 

Wm^ 

(i/oOO) 

, AAA. 

0.05 

Spectru 

20 
Ibf 
10 

1 

1 

f^ 

f/ 

i 

il 

J J_Ai-i 

1 

\i 

\ 

AJ>i. 

La—. 

1000 
Hz 

2000 

Figure 4.13: Cutting Forces and Spectrum for I Down MilIing(Adapted from [32]) 

Jli*— — -•--ii«t»**««— i?ir>5^i»'l««-i!1»*iCt4'»*«e«ni 

Ibf 

132 

Mtiii 

0.05 

Figure 4.14: Simulated Cutting Force for | Down Milling (Adapted from [32]) 

Figure 4.13 b) and three dominant modes are labeled. The first mode at 300 Hz is due to 
the contact force of the cutter, the second mode at 550 Hz is due to the natural frequency 
of the table dynamometer. The third mode at 1200 Hz represents the vibration of the end 
mill cutter. The average or DC component of the force is obtained at the u; = Hz line, 
see Figure 4.13 c), and the average force in the Y direction, Fyav = 6.2 lbs (27.6 N). 

Further information about the cutting forces are obtained through simulation. A 
simulation of the cutting process described above was performed and the force in the 
Y direction, Fy is shown in Figure 4.14 and corresponds well to the actual forces in 
Figure 4.13 a). Actually, Figure 4.14 is more correct because the record in Figure 4.13 a) 
is distorted due to the insufficient bandwidth of the dynamometer. 

The above figures concentrate on the steady state, constant immersion operation and 
they clearly show the periodic component of the force. As mentioned previously, the struc- 
tural deflections of the robot cannot follow such a high frequency. Instead, the deflections 
will respond to the average force applied to the robot due to the milling operation. In 
steady state operation, the average force is constant and is equal to the measured DC 
component. 

As noted earlier, as the MMR varies, the cutting forces vary proportionally. A transient 
due to a variation of the stock to be removed, i.e. a variation in the radial depth of cut will 
be evaluated. Such a variation originates from the fact that the sheet metal part is first 
cut by a shear to an approximate shape and inevitably, the difference between this shape 
and the final desired shape will vary. An extreme case of such a variation is a step change 

133 

Figure 4.15: Step Change in Workpiece Material (Adapted from [32]) 

Ibf 

Figure 4.16: Simulation of the Average Cutting Force Through Transients (Adapted from 
[32]) 

in the metal to be removed, Figure 4.15. For this step change, the cutter engages the step 
gradually, and this is defined as the entry transient. Similarly, there may be a step down 
in the stock to be removed and this constitutes an exit transient. The normal forces for 
this case of entrance and exit transients were simulated and are presented in Figure 4.16. 
This graph shows that when steps are encountered in the workpiece, the resulting cutting 
force does not change as a step. Furthermore, steps in the average cutting force are hardly 
ever encountered in real cutting operations because the changes in the workpiece are more 
gradual. 

Compensation Scheme 

In order to compensate for the deflections caused by the cutting forces, a method was 
developed which includes three major components: 

134 

N 

Figure 4.17: Deflection Compensation Along Robot Path (Adapted from [32]) 

1. A position dependant flexibility model of the robot. 

2. A dynamometer to measure the cutting forces. 

3. An additional short travel proportional servo which is attached to the wrist of the 
robot, and carries the router. 

The flexibility model and the cutting forces were described earlier. Now the requirements 
of the additional servo will be discussed. 

Due to the nature of edge-milling, only a single degree-of-motion must be accurately 
controlled, and this is in the direction of the normal force, N, see Figure 4.17. Deflections 
in the directions perpendicular to N do not affect the machined contour. Thus, only a 
single degree-of- freedom compensator is required to eliminate the deflections of the robot, 
6n- The robot is then programmed so the slide of the compensator is always oriented in 
the direction N of the cutting force. The single degree-of-freedom position compensator 
has been completely described in the previous chapter, but a quick review will be provided 
here. 

Figure 4.18 illustrates a simple block diagram of the external compensator, and in- 
troduces its major components. With the pre-programmed path of the robot known, 
the position dependent flexibility matrix is pre-calculated at given increments and stored 
off-line in the controller. For a given robot position along the pre-programmed path, 
the appropriate flexibility matrix is taken out of memory and multiplied by the external 

---■'>?■»*•* *"iO» 

135 

Tool 
Pos i t ion 
j». 

Flex 
Mart ix 

Xd - Calculated 
Compensatory 
Disp lacement 

Xa - Actual 

Displacement 

Xe - Differ ence 

Compute r 

Xd 

Xe 

Motor 
Con t ro 1 

Mo tor 

Xa 

-^ Xa 

Figure 4.18: Block Diagram of Flexibility Compensator 

cutting forces measured in real time by the dynamometer. The result is the required 
compensatory displacement. This displacement is compared to the actual displacement of 
the tool slide, and the diiference is used to drive the compensator to its desired position. 
There, the cutting process produces new cutting forces, which in turn cause the robot to 
deflect. 

Three possible versions of the controlling program will now be described. In the first 
version of the controlling program, the user is prompted to enter the flexibilities in the 
X, Y and Z directions. These values would be calculated previously and recorded for a 
desired position of the robot. The flexibility values change very little for small motions 
of the tool, so a single set of flexibility values are appropriate for limited displacements 
at the tool. Thus, for limited motions (6 in, 152 mm or less for example) a single set of 
flexibility values is valid. Static tests were performed using the flexibility compensation 
technique and the results are presented in the following section. 

In a second version of the controlling program, a number of different flexibility matrices 
could be precalculated for a given path and be recalled at the proper time. Because the 
compensation controller does not have direct knowledge of the location of the end effector. 

136 

the approximate location of the tool can be estimated. Knowing the starting point, the 
direction of motion and desired velocity of the end effector, the position of the end effector 
is approximately known for any given instance in time. However, if the robot was stopped 
unexpectedly or the timing was inaccurate, the estimated position would not coincide with 
the actual position of the robot and the flexibility values would then be erroneous, causing 
faults in the commanded compensation displacement. 

The desired compensation method would require communication between the robot 
controller and the compensator controller, so that the exact location of the end-effector 
or tool would be known at all times. Recently, a software package produced by Cincinnati 
Milacron allows communication between the robot controller and other computers, includ- 
ing PCs. This would be a desirable feature if this method of compensation was pursued 
further. 

Experiments and Results 

Two kinds of performance tests were conducted on the compensator. First, static test 
were carried out in several robot configurations, and second, actual dynamic cutting tests 
were performed and evaluated. 

For the static tests, a desired position and orientation of the tool was provided, and the 
flexibility coefficients were then produced off-line for those configurations. These values 
were then entered into the control program and testing commenced. Static forces were 
applied horizontally to the tool to simulate various cutting forces. These constant forces 
were obtained by suspending a weight on a cable over a pulley and attaching the other 
end of the cable to the tool. Capacitance probes attached to a rigid frame were used to 
measure displacements of the tool as the forces were applied. 

In the first position tested, the robot was in a somewhat extended configuration, see 
Figure 4.19 and the actual position is listed in the following table: 

137 

Figure 4.19: T3-776 Robot in Extended Configuration (Adapted from [32]) 

Position of End Effector For Extended Configuration 
Position (inches) Orientation (degrees) 

X 

65.94 

D 

180 

Y 

35.23 

E 

Z 

8.72 

R 

90.2 

Forces were applied in both the X and Y directions and the displacement was measured 
parallel to the slide of the compensator (Y direction). The following table illustrates the 
effects of compensation for the various applied forces. 

Displacement In An Extended Configuration 

Force Deflection Y (*10-^ in) 

Direction Level (lbs) Un-compensated Compensated 

X 17 2^6 

X 43 8.9 0.2 

X 69 15.5 0.4 

X 95 21.1 0.5 

Y 17 12.4 0.8 

Y 43 28.4 1.4 

Y 69 39.5 2.1 

138 

Figure 4.20: T3-776 Robot in Retracted Configuration (Adapted from [32]) 

This results in a measured flexibility of 0.00021 inch/lb (1.21 +10"^ m/N) in the X 
direction and 0.00073 inch/lb (4.21 *10~^ n/N) in the Y direction. Deflections up to 
0.0395 inch (0.76 mm) were reduced to approximately 0.002 inch (0.051 mm), an order of 
magnitude in improvement. A similar test was performed, this time with the robot in a 
somewhat retracted conflguration, as seen in Figure 4.20 and the actual position is listed 
in the following table: 

Position of End Effector For Retracted Conflguration 

Position (inches) 

Orientation (degrees) 

X 32.51 D 

Y 0.11 E 

Z 8.54 R 

180 

Again, forces were applied in both the X and Y directions and the measurements were 
measured parallel to the slide, this time in the X direction. The following table shows the 
result of this static measurement: 

139 

Displacement In An Retracted Configuration 

Force Deflection X (*10~^zn) 

Direction Level (lbs) Un-compensated Compensated 

X 

17 

5.1 

0.7 

X 

43 

12.1 

1.4 

X 

69 

20.0 

2.3 

Y 

17 

6.72 

0.9 

Y 

43 

16.8 

2.0 

Y 

69 

26.3 

3.1 

For this position the flexibility in the X was equal to 0.00029 inch/lb (1.67 *10~^ 
m/N)and in the Y direction, the flexibility is equal to 0.00039 inch/lb (2.25 *10-^ m/X). 
For both configurations, the compensator was able eliminate most of the deflection error 
and that the remainder is acceptably small. It is conceivable that further improvement 
is possible by better calibrations of the flexibility model or by trial and error for that 
particular position. 

With these results established, and the flexibility coefficients verified, actual cutting 
tests were performed in the above mentioned configurations. Straight line motions were 
chosen for the tests because they permit an easy and accurate evaluation of the results. 
Straight line motions for articulated robots require as much coordinated motions between 
the joints as any curved motions. 

The first cutting test was performed with the robot in the retracted configuration, 
shown in Figure 4.20. In this configuration, the robot was commanded to move along 
a straight path parallel to the global Y direction, Yg at 10 inches/min (25.4 cm/min). 
The workpiece was mounted on a rigid table and oriented parallel to the Yg direction 
also. The major force component of the milling operation, the normal force, was aligned 
approximately in the global X direction Xg. Thus, deflections in the Xg direction would 
result. 

The workpiece was an aluminum alloy, 7075, sheet 0.1875 inch (4.76 mm) thick. Square 
steps were pre-machined along its straight periphery and the robot was programmed so 

Ibf 
12 

140 

r 

T T 

1 inches 2 

Figure 4.21: Workpiece with Pre-machined Steps and Simulated Cutting Forces (Adapted 
from [32]) 

0.015 

1 inches 2 

Figure 4.22: Uncompensated Milling Cut Along Yg (Adapted from [32]) 

that the cutting tool would remove those steps. Figure 4.21 shows the steps, and the 
cutter was programmed to move along the broken line in the figure. A simulation of the 
average resultant normal cutting force versus the cutter path is also presented, and it 
corresponds to the previously discussed variation in force shown in Figure 4.16. 

The robot proceeded along the path, and the cut was made with the compensation both 
active and inactive. Profilograms were later made of the workpieces by fixing the workpiece 
to the table of a milling machine, and attaching a capacitance probe to the headstock of 
the milling machine. As the table moved the workpiece under the capacitance probe at a 
known, constant velocity the output of the probe was recorded by a data logger. Using 
this technique, very accurate records (+/- 0.001 inch or +/- 0.025 mm) of the surface 
workpiece could be produced. 

As can be seen in Figure 4.22, the profilogram of the workpiece, produced without 
using compensation, clearly shows the effects of the increased normal forces due to the 

141 

0.010 — j 
inches 

A r^ 

"~X ^-^ /^ 

/^-^ 

0.005 — 

1 -J 

\J 

^ 

— 

1 inches 

Figure 4.23: Compensated Milling Cut Along Yg (Adapted from [32]) 

steps in the workpiece. Remember that the desired contour of the workpiece is a straight 
line. The unevenness of the surface is a combination of both the errors of the execution of 
the straight line motion of the robot and the deflection due to the cutting force. However, 
the bumps in the profilogram closely correspond to the simulated resultant average cutting 
forces in Figure 4.21. The resulting displacements exceed the desired surface tolerances. 

This same test was repeated, and in this instance, the compensation was active. Fig- 
ure 4.23 shows the resulting profilograna for this milling operation. The resultant profile 
of the workpiece shows little correspondence to the original pre-machined surface. 

A similar test was performed, this time with the robot in a somewhat extended config- 
uration, as illustrated in Figure 4.20. In this configuration, the robot was programmed to 
traverse along a straight line parallel to the global X direction, Xg. This results in the nor- 
mal cutting force being applied along the global Y direction, Yg. Again, the workpiece had 
steps premachined on its surface, causing variations in the normal cutting force. In this 
case, as the milling process occurred, the compensation was first left off, then activated 
and finally turned off again. In Figure 4.24, the steps of the workpiece are superimposed, 
and the transitions between the compensated and uncompensated regions are indicated. 
Displacements of 0.010 to 0.020 inch (0.25 to 0.50 mm) in the uncompensated region were 
reduced to approximately 0.003 to 0.005 inch (0.076 to 0.127 mm) in the compensated 
region. Again, errors of the path show up in this figure. 

An additional source of error is due to the rather course resolution of the force/torque 
sensor, +/- 1 pound (4 N). The maximum normal force generated by the milling operation 

0.020 — t 

uncompensated compensated unconipensated 

"T 

142 

inches 

-0.020 

UK/" 

^ 

inches 

U 

Figure 4.24: Profilogram of Workpiece From Extended Configuration (Adapted from [32]) 

was equal to approximately 12 pounds (48 N), thus the maximum round-off error due to 
the coarse resolution would approach 8% or between 0.001 and 0.002 inch (0.025 and 0.050 
mm). For heavier cuts, or by using a more accurate force transducer, the round-off error 
due to the coarse resolution could be significantly reduced. 

The execution of the straight line path without any externally applied forces has errors 
on the order of 0.005 to 0.010 inch (0.125 to 0.25 mm). These errors are of the same 
magnitude as those deflections resulting from the forces produced by the milling operation. 
That is why the profilograms for the compensated milling operations exhibit non-smooth 
surface finish. It should be mentioned that the test cuts were rather light, because the 
spindle used was a low power one and often the Metal Removal Rate is two to four 
times heavier. This would correspond in proportionally larger deflections, which could be 
effectively eliminated with the active compensation. The tests which were conducted at 
the power limit of the router, any larger MRR would have stalled the router. 

To fairly test the dynamic capabilities of the deflection compensation scheme, an ad- 
ditional experiment should be performed. The external compensator and the force/torque 
transducers should be mounted to the headstock of a milling machine via a flexible cou- 
pling as illustrated in Figure 4.25. The single degree-of-freedom flexible coupling would 
provide a constant flexibility approximately equal to that encountered by the robot. The 

143 

Head 
Stock 

Flexibiie 
Coupling 

Force/Torque 
Dynamometer 

External 
Compensator 

Workpiece 

Direction 
Of Travel 

Figure 4.25: Dynamic Deflection Compensation Capability Evaluation Setup 

Right Angle 
Bracket 

144 

Capacitance 
Probe - 

Figure 4.26: Straight Line Measurement Fixture 

milling machine would provide a high precision, straight line, constant velocity motion. 
This would eliminate the straight line motion errors encountered with the T3-776 robot 
and would allow an unbiased evaluation of the complete deflection compensation system. 
Steps would again be premachined into the workpiece as previously described, varying the 
normal cutting forces. 

To demonstrate the poor execution of straight line motion, the robot was commanded 
to repeat the path which was used for the retracted cutting test. A capacitance probe 
was attached to the end effector of the robot, and finely machined right angle bracket was 
mounted on the work table as illustrated in Figure 4.26. The capacitance probe could 
then directly measure the displacement of the deviation of the robot along the straight 
line path. The profilogram is presented in Figure 4.27 and deviations of up to 0.010 inch 
(0.25 mm) are evident. It should be noted that this motion is highly repeatable, as this 
same motion was repeated several times, and the profilograms were superimposed. The 
difference was less than 0.002 inch (0.050 mm). 

In conclusion, the flexibility modeling and deflection compensation were successful, 
however, the results were somewhat overshadowed by the poor straight line motion of the 

22.50 

DISPLACEMENT 

LIN 

TIME (SEC) 

e.aiGss 

145 

DISPLRCEMENT 

T 

■ 

0.01000 

RT INPUT LIN -L /"^ 
CH 1 ^^ 

^ 

A A 

A A 

-. 

1X+ 

INCHES 1 

/vv-\r-^ 

y\ / ^ • ^ 

- 

V 

v 

L 

0.3 

■ 

- 

1 

1 

23.50 

RT INPUT LIN J 
CH 1 J 

1X+ -I 

INCHES 

-S. 01500 " 

^'^\vVH/#*'/ 

^ 

^^ivVA 

-1 r- 

0.0 
TIME(SEC): 22.46 

Vrr 

1 1 1 1 1 1 1 r- 

LIN TIME(SEC) 

RMPL: 5.790e-03 

1 RRM? r 

I t 

22.00 

Figure 4.27: Proiilogram of the Straight Line Motion of Robot In Retracted Configuration 

robot. The static tests showed that the deflections due to applied force could be almost 
completely eliminated given the proper flexibility coefficients. 

CHAPTER 5 
IMPROVING THE STRAIGHT LINE PERFORMANCE OF AN INDUSTRIAL 

ROBOT 

The surface quality of the parts described in the previous chapter were of sub-standard 
quality even after employing flexibility compensation. This was in part due to the poor 
straight line motion of the robot. Without any external loads applied, the straight line 
motion of the robot was poor, deviations of +/- 0.015 inch (0.38 mm) from the desired 
path were encountered. By improving the straight line motion of the robot and then 
adding deflection compensation, the dynamic cutting results could be greatly improved, 
thus meeting the requirements of templateless edge milling. 

In general, straight line motions of the robot are representative of all desired smooth 
motion of the robot. Straight line motions have the distinct advantages over other types 
of smooth motions (curved motions for example), because they are typically easier to 
program and records of the motions are simpler to obtain. Thus any improvement in the 
straight line motion of the robot would also help to improve any desired smooth motion 
of the end-effector. In this section, several items related to improving the straight line 
motion of the robot will be discussed, including: 

• Probable causes of poor straight line motion of the robot. 

• Several corrective methods which were investigated. 

• The simulation, implementation methodology and results of an accelerometric com- 
pensation method. 

Cartesian motions are used in a number of robots, where the configuration of the 
hand (or the tool) is specified in Cartesian coordinates at specific points along the path. 
Obviously, transformations are required to provide the necessary joint coordinates from 
the recorded cartesian coordinates. The Cincinnati Milacron T3 series robots move the 

146 

147 

hand along "straight" lines from each programmed point with controlled velocity and 
acceleration, [56]. 

There are several general methods which are used to generate the motion of the robot 
between taught points. One of the initial methods was developed in 1974 by Paul [57,58] 
where intermediate points are interpolated at regular intervals along the path. These 
interpolated points are then back transformed to joint coordinates, and are used to drive 
the individual servos. A similar method, where the intermediate points are evaluated every 
100 msec was, was also proposed by Paul. A second method requires the motion sequences 
of the end effector to pass through "knot" points. This method leaves the undefined 
motions between the knot points, which could lead to excess errors at the end effector. A 
third approach adds enough intermediate points so that the manipulator may be controlled 
by linear interpolations of joint values without allowing the hand to deviate more than 
a pre-specihed amount from a straight line Cartesian path. This substantially reduces 
the amount of real time computation required to drive the machine and permits problems 
arising from degenerate joint alignments to be handled more easily, [59]. However, all of 
these methods rely on the ideal situation of knowing the exact position of each joint, and 
the assumption that the actual geometric features of the robot correspond to the model 
used in the transformations. 

Probable Causes of Poor Straight Line Motion 

In the introductory section, several factors are listed as probable sources of positional 
error at the end-effector and most of those factors are directly related to the poor straight 
I line motion of the robot. Many of these factors not only affect the motion capabilities of 

the robot, but the absolute positioning of the robot also. The factors causing these errors 
include environmental factors, kinematic factors, dynamic factors, measurement factors 
and computational factors. 

In the previous chapters, dynamic factors such as structural flexibilities and varying 
inertia! loads were described in detail and methods to eliminate those effects were sim- 

148 

ulated and demonstrated with positive results. However, the improvements realized by 
the implementation of the structural flexibility compensation are overshadowed by the 
inherent poor straight line motion of the robot. This trait of poor straight line motion 
greatly reduces the potential applications for this particular robot and other similar types 
of industrial robots. 

It was out of the scope of this research to attempt to improve the straight line motion 
of the robot by increasing the resolution of the encoders, reducing geartrain backlash, 
providing additional significant bits in the controller or compensating the geometric errors 
of the kinematic equations of motion. Instead, a set of requirements was established for 
the system necessary to improve the straight line motion of the end-effector: 

• The compensation scheme could be implemented on the T3-776 robot without having 
to make any modifications to the existing resolvers/encoders, geartrain, controllers, 
etc. 

• The compensation scheme should be generic so that it could be implemented on 
other makes and models of industrial robots without making modifications to the 
compensator. 

• The compensation system would be a self contained device, which did not rely on 
the capabilities of the existing robot. 

From the previous chapter, deviations of up to +/- 0.010 inch (0.25 mm) were recorded 
for a typical straight line motion. However, this motion was repeatable, within +/- 0.003 
inch (0.076 mm) for one particular straight line path. Theoretically, if all motions of the 
robot were exactly repeatable, the trajectory errors could be recorded and compensated 
for in future playbacks. However, the displacement error is not highly repeatable in some 
instances, due to changes in external forces, friction, temperature, and other environmental 
factors. 

In the next section, several methods of improving the straight line motion of the robot 
will be discussed. These methods will not require any previous knowledge of the positional 

149 

error. 

Methods to Eliminate Straight Line Motion Errors 

Several methods to eliminate straight line motion errors were explored. These methods 
were designed to be robot independent and somewhat portable, where the compensator 
could be implemented on many different types of industrial robots, as in the flexibility 
compensation task. The methods include: 

• Adaptive direct positional feedback via a target following scheme. The desired tool 
path would be inscribed on the work piece and an integral vision system would 
provide feedback directly to the compensation servo. 

• A non-contact visual tracking system consisting of three laser interferometers, a tar- 
get retroreflector, target tracking system and controller which calculates the position 
of the target in Cartesian coordinates. Through triangulation, an accurate position 
of the end-effector could be provided through out the work space of the robot in real 
time. 

• A force feedback method, where forces at the end effector (currently monitored for 
the flexibility compensation) could be used to help maintain smooth motions during 
straight line motions. 

• Direct displacement feedback using a displacement probe. A capacitance probe or 
linear velocity displacement transducer (LVDT) would measure the straight line 
performance of the robot and would control the position of the compensation servo. 

• Adaptive positional feedback via accelerometric measurements at the tool holder. 
These signals would be integrated twice revealing positional information and that 
information would be used to control the compensation servo. 

It is obvious that templates could be used to guide the end-effector along straight 
trajectories. However, the main thrust of this research was to provide accurate positional 
control at the tool without the use of templates. 

150 

Fixed 
Camera 

External 
Compensator 

Figure 5.1: Direct Visual Feedback Scheme 
Adaptive Direct Visual Feedback 

Direct visual feedback schemes could be used to improve the straight line motion of 
the end effector. They would also be useful in reducing positional errors due to most other 
described causes including structural flexibility, inadequate encoder resolution, etc. Tliis 
method of compensation would require the desired tool path to be inscribed directly onto 
the workpiece and in many instances, this would require a scribing template to be made 
for each different type of part. 

As in the robot structure flexibility compensation scheme, this direct visual compen- 
sation scheme would utilize an external compensation servo which is kept normal to the 
desired tool path at all times. Figure 5.1 schematically represents the direct visual feed- 
back mechanism. 

The direct visual feedback scheme would incorporate a visual feedback device such 
as a CCD video camera. The camera would be fixed to the compensator, directly above 
the router and the tool path would remain within the camera's field-of-view at all times. 

151 

The output of the visual sensor array of the camera would be directly ported to an array 
processor located in a IBM PC- AT (or equivalent clone) and be processed in a real time 
fashion. The standard RS 170 video rate is 60 Hz, interlaced. This would provide a real 
time visual feedback tool at a reasonable price. 

The control scheme would require that the inscribed tool path be kept centered in the 
visual array. An algorithm would locate the image of the inscribed tool path and if the 
tool path deviated away from the center of the visual array, an error signal proportional 
to the positional error would be directed to the external compensation servo (described 
earlier) and cause the tool to be moved back to the center of the visual array. 

This compensation scheme could be implemented rather easily and with little addi- 
tional cost. A high resolution CCD camera, lens, array processor and light source could 
be purchased for approximately $6000. A camera and light bracket would have to be de- 
signed, manufactured and installed on the robot. The compensator controller could reside 
on a single PC with the array processor and I/O ports on the same backplane, increasing 
the speed of the control loop. 

Not only would errors due to poor straight line motion be eliminated, but all other 
errors including those due to structural flexibilities could be eliminated in real time. As 
mentioned previously, the major drawbacks of this method of compensation are: scribing 
templates must be created for each different type of part and each workpiece would require 
the tool path to be inscribed on it. For these reasons, this method of compensation was 
not pursued for further development. 

Non-Contact Visual Feedback 

Non-contacting visual tracking systems were also explored. These systems would re- 
quire a target to be placed on the robot as close to the tool (end mill) as possible. A 
target following mechanism would then provide the absolute location of the target in real 
time to the compensation controller. The actual position, in Cartesian World coordinates, 
measured by the tracking system would be compared to the desired position of the target 

152 

Laser Interferometer 
System 

Figure 5.2: Laser Interferometric Robot Arm Position Measurement System 

and the difference of tliese two values would be used to control the compensation servo 
mechanism. Again, a single degree-of-freedom compensator could be used for the milhng 
operation. However, this method could provide positional errors in X,Y and Z coordi- 
nates. For more difficult tasks, a three degree-of-freedom compensator could be developed 
to take advantage of the additional information. 

When a target spherical retroreflector is attached to the end effector of the robot, a 
single tracking interferometer could automatically follow the arm and measure its radial 
position within -I-/- 0.04 inch (1.0 mm). For improved precision, three trackers are used 
to measure three radial distances, see Figure 5.2. With the three radial displacements 
accurately known, position is calculated geometrically using the trilateration method. 
Calculated root mean square error in Cartesian coordinates is less than 6 microns for a 
three meter cube as claimed by a vendor, Chesapeake Laser Systems [60]. A particular 
device built by Chesapeake Laser Systems was designed to "meet the requirements of nu- 
merous applications in which fast, noncontact measurements on the order of a thousandth 

153 

of an inch are needed over a large volume. This method can give machine tool accuracy 
to robots, thereby extending their applications." 

The trackers operate by emitting a relatively low power (1 miliwatt) laser beam from 
a HeNe laser. The beam strikes the target, a retroreflective lens, and the reflection is 
detected by a quadrant-photodetector. The quadrature sensor is basically a light sensitive 
disk broken into quadrants whose analog outputs are sent to a bridge type comparator. 
The comparator then provides an analog signal related to the direction of the positional 
error of the elevation and azimuth of the tracker. As the reflected laser beam strays 
from the center of the quadrant-photodetector, it provides an error signal to the servo 
controller, and the error is eliminated over time. The servos try to maintain the position 
of the reflected beam in the center of the quadrature. 

After an appropriate calibration routine, the position of the retroreflectors can be 
obtained by two methods. The first method mentioned earlier involves the use of three 
interferometers. The second method uses a single interferometer, where the radial distance 
is measured and the azimuth and elevation as measured by the shaft encoders on the 
tracker are used. A simple transformation would convert the spherical coordinate inputs 
{T,d,(f)) to Cartesian coordinates. 

The single tracker with measurement of the two angles appears to offer the better 
solution at first glance. However, closer examination reveals certain problems: the angle 
measurement assumes that the tracker is locked onto the retroreflector with zero error. No 
practical dynamic tracking servo system is error free. In fact the error in the angle shows up 
as a large tangential error. While some dynamic compensation is possible if the magnitude 
and direction of the errors are known, dynamic and high accuracy measurements are more 
difficult with this system than with multiple trackers. 

Triangulation with three or more tracking interferometers does not require high accu- 
racy angular encoders, because the only function of the servo system is to keep the tracker 
locked onto the retroreflector. Such a system can dispense with the large, high accuracy 
encoders and simplify the mechairical design. Any error in angular alignment shows up as 

154 

a cosine error in the interferometer radial measurement. Sucli errors are insignificant for 
near normal incidence, particularly when the primary error is on the order of 0.001 inch 
(0.025 mm). In addition, the distance-measuring interferometer can be sampled at a rate 
in excess of 100 Hz and can provide accurate measurements (+/- 0.001 inch or 0.025 mm) 
at those speeds, [60]. 

The main limitation involved in applying laser interferometry technology is cost. As of 
October 1987, the total cost of implementing three tracking interferometers, the controller 
and other necessary hardware totals approximately $150,000 [60]. Also there is a limit 
to the maximum radial tracking velocity, 12 in/sec (0.30 m/sec). However, with the 
high accuracy and update rate, laser interferometry appears to be an excellent method 
to monitor the position of the end effector. As mentioned earlier, the measured position 
would be compared to the desired position and the difference would be used to control the 
external single degree-of-freedom compensator. This method of compensation was also 
eliminated at this time because of costs. 

Force Monitoring Compensation 

Straight line motion of the end effector and tool could be improved by monitoring 
the cutting forces with the force/torque sensor at the wrist. From a previous section on 
cutting force mechanics, it can be shown that during a cut with constant feed rate and 
depth of cut, the resulting cutting forces are constant. Obviously, this would be true if 
the tool was making a slotting cut with a constant feedrate, indicating a constant metal 
removal rate. Any variation in either the tangential or normal force during a slotting cut 
with constant feed would indicate a deviation from the desired straight line motion of the 
tool. By requiring the average normal force to remain constant, the displacement of the 
compensator could be controlled through a force loop. 

Previously, it was assumed that the amount of material to be removed varied along 
the tool path. If it is now required that the amount of flash (material to be removed) is 
constrained to be greater than the diameter of the routing tool, then the tool will always 

155 

be engaged in a slotting cut. Thus, the normal and tangential forces calculated from the 
dynamic cutting model, would be known for the entire cutting operation. 

Assuming that the desired tool path is accurately known, the compensator is always 
maintained normal to that desired trajectory, and the cutter moves along the workpiece 
at a constant velocity, then the normal and tangential forces as measured by the com- 
pensator should remain constant. Any motion of the cutting tool normal to the desired 
trajectory (due to the poor straight line motion of the robot) would cause the normal force 
to vary. Since this measured normal force would be different than the desired normal force, 
a force error would be produced, and this force error would be used to drive the external 
compensator/tool back to the desired position. This method has been successfully simu- 
lated using a model of the compensation servo mechanism and inputting a sinusoidal force 
perturbation. 

The simulation contained a simplified single degree-of- freedom flexibility model, and 
the controlling equation was implemented as follows: 

Xn = [FLEX]*{2*Fa-Fc) (5.1) 

where 

Xn - the desired compensation displacement in the normal direction 
[FLEX] - the one dimensional flexibility value in the normal direction 
Fa - the actual measured normal force 
Fc - the computed desired normal force 

When the robot was following its desired trajectory, the measured normal force would 
be equal to the computed normal force and the equation would be simplified as follows: 

Xn = [FLEX] * Fa (5.2) 

This is equivalent to the one dimensional case of the flexibility compensation scheme dis- 
cussed in the previous chapter. Thus, this scheme would allow compensation for positional 
errors due to both flexibilities of the robot structure and for the poor straight line path 

156 

performance of the robot. The same force dynamometer and single degree-of- freedom 
compensator would be used as previously described. 

The flexibility value, [FLEX] includes all flexibilities of the robot and compensator in 
the normal direction of the cut. However, if the flexibility of the compensator was made 
much greater than that of the robot, it would be unnecessary to develop a highly accurate 
model of the robot structure flexibilities in the normal direction. This would eliminate 
the requirement of detailed flexibility modeling, only simple static measurements would 
be needed to improve the accuracy. 

As mentioned earlier, this method would require that the routing tool be engaged in 
a slotting cut at all times, which might not be feasible in some instances. In addition, 
the force must be accurately measured in a real time fashion. Presently, the force/torque 
transducer used has a reasonable update rate (100+ Hz), but the resolution is inadequate. 
The resolution of the force transducer is +/- 1 pound (4.45 N), and the typical normal 
force attainable for the slotting cut is 5 and 20 pounds (22.3 and 89.0 N). The poor res- 
olution of the force/torque transducer would introduce compensation errors, as described 
in the previous chapter. However, a high resolution force sensor could be developed and 
incorporated with the external compensator. As single degree-of-freedom device could be 
built and installed parallel to the slide mechanism of the compensator, in that way, the 
normal cutting forces would be directly monitored. 

This method would only be useful during the steady state, full immersion cut. Entrance 
and exit cuts in addition to variable feedrates would result in poor compensation. Thus, 
this method of improving the straight line performance was also abandoned. 

Direct Displacement Feedback 

The displacement of the tool from the desired path could be directly measured with a 
displacement probe. As mentioned previously, a capacitance probe was used to measure 
the displacement of the end effector from the desired path. The probe produces an ana- 
log output proportional to the measured displacement, and this signal could be used to 

157 

Capacitance 
Probe 2 

External 
Compensator 

Capacitance/ 
Probe 1 

Conditioning 
Amplifier 

Motor 
Controller 

Data 
Logger 

Figure 5.3: External Compensator Calibration Setup 

drive the external compensator. This method of compensation was tested with excellent 
results. However, a guide or displacement reference (template) must again be used for the 
measurement reference. 

When the displacement errors of the robot path were being measured, it was apparent 
that the analog signal being recorded by the data logger could also be used to drive the 
compensating servo. A method of using the probe to control the compensator was devel- 
oped. First a means of calibrating the compensation technique was devised. Figure 5.-3 
shows the calibration setup, where two identical displacement probes were used. The first 
probe was attached to the compensator, the second probe was attached to static fixture, 
where the displacement could be changed as required. The output of both probes were first 
sent to a conditioning amplifier and then to a data logger. The output of the first probe 

158 

was also directed to the motor controller. In the motor controller, the actual position 
of the compensator Xa, was subtracted from the desired position x^, and the difference 
was used to drive the position of the compensator. The gain of xj, was adjusted until 
the displacement of first probe xi was equal to the second probe X2. Additionally, the 
velocity feedback gain was adjusted so that the system was critically damped, eliminating 
overshoots for step inputs in position. 

Next, a dynamic test was performed by commanding the robot to traverse along a 
straight trajectory, parallel to the global Y axis. The right angle bracket was mounted 
on the table parallel to the desired path, and the capacitance probe would then detect 
error displacements from the straight line motion. During the first pass, the compensator 
was turned off, and the resulting deviations were recorded on the data logger. The path 
was repeated, and during this trial the compensator was activated. Because the motion 
of the robot along this trajectory is highly repeatable, this method of comparing the 
uncompensated and compensated motion appeared to be accurate. 

The uncompensated motion had deviations of approximately +/- 0.010 inch (0.25 
mm), as described in the previous chapter. However, the compensated system was able to 
reduce motion errors to less than +/- 0.002 inch (0.050 mm). These displacement errors 
may have been further reduced if the bandwidth of the servo had been greater. 

This method of compensation provides a closed loop control mechanism which elimi- 
nates all sources of trajectory errors, including errors due to structural flexibilities. This 
method still requires a "template" to be attached to the work piece to guide the robot. 
However, it would be a light weight device because no contact would be made between 
the template and the tool. For straight line motion, this method of compensation would 
be quite simple to implement. Complex three dimensional trajectories would greatly com- 
plicate this compensation method, because three dimensional guides would have to be 
provided. Thus the accelerometric compensation was pursued where no templates would 
be required. 

159 

II 

t3 I Hill 

.SJ-ACCEL. M| ,|i\lA>W» '-' V '^' . '' | '' ' ^ 

s . V ff.,tf-i..,.', ' I ' / , 1 ^ . '^ ! V A;tWY'f ".'.■<>■'— >*■• 

■,-^*y;\ \ 

Figure 5.4: Record of Acceleration, Velocity and Position Using Cascading Integrators 
(Adapted from [62]) 

Accelerometric Positional Feedback 

Accelerometric feedback has been used successfully as a means of keeping track of 
the position of objects for over 20 years. Inertial guidance systems use accelerometer 
measurements to obtain positional information with high resolution over extended periods 
of time. Examples of these inertial systems include missiles, weapons and aircraft guidance. 

Accelerometers were also used in the early 1960's for Shock Measurement Systems. 
The signals were integrated and double integrated to provide velocity and positional in- 
formation, respectively. The applications for these systems required a linear response over 
a wide dynamic range, "acceleration signals of less than one tenth of a "g" to several 
thousand "g" occur over a range of near static (zero frequency) to many kilocycles" [61]. 
Accelerometers were attached to the missiles under investigation. The accelerometer sig- 
nals were recorded on a magnetic tape recorder, and the recorded signals were integrated 
and double integrated and recorded on a strip chart recorder. Figure 5.4 provides an ex- 
ample of the dynamic results of the integration technique. Several things should be noted 
in Figure 5.4. The time records were for relatively short time periods, 100 ms. A drift 
in the positional signal results in that record sloping upward as time progresses; however, 
the change in position is plainly evident. 

Oleson [62] points out that the accelerometer and integrator must be stable at the 

160 
lowest signal levels, linear over the full dynamic range required and not adversely affected 
by noise. A combined amplifier integrator circuit was developed over a period of years 
to meet the conditions above. The circuit consisted of a very stable voltage controlled 
oscillator supplying a series of fixed charge increments to an integrating capacitor. The 
long time average of the capacitor voltage is held at zero by incorporating a feedback loop. 

The integrators incorporated a second-order cut-off filter that imposed a limit on the 
time interval over which accurate integration could be obtained. As pointed out in Oleson 
[62], any practical integrator requires a low frequency cut-off to compensate imperfect 
stability. This attenuates the low frequency response of the integrator. Due to the ad- 
vancement in electronics over the past twenty years, it was intuitive that the integrators 
could be improved, so that they could be operated over longer durations, without drift 
and within the necessary frequency range required by the compensator. However, as will 
be discovered in the next section, even with modern components and design techniques, 
integration of low frequency signals is a demanding task. 

For the compensation scheme used to improve the straight line motion of the robot, a 
single accelerometer is attaclied to the external servo, oriented parallel to the motion of 
the slide table of the compensator. Thus, any motions of the tool normal to the desired 
path of the tool would be detected by the accelerometer, and used by the compensation 
scheme to eliminate those errors. This open loop system would detect acceleration, pre- 
dict displacement and correct for positional errors in a real time fashion. Accelerometric 
compensation will be discussed in detail in the following section. 

Accelerometric Compensation 

As mentioned previously, by double integrating the output of an accelerometer, posi- 
tional information can be obtained. In the ideal case, six properly oriented accelerometers 
could be attached to the end effector of the robot, and the position of the end effector could 
be accurately estimated at all times. Unfortunately, real accelerometers and integration 
techniques limit the success of this technique. Nonetheless, accelerometric compensation 

161 

P(s-)- 

ss 

-A 

Kp 

\. 

■>, ^ 

Ka 

Kt 

-R 

+ *Q;y - 

1+Ts 

Ls4 

Hu 

Acceleration 
Disturbance 

"0- 

Rs 

Pa 

Figure 5.5: Block Diagram of Acceleration Compensation Model 

was pursued as a method of improving the relative straight line motion quality of the 
robot. 

By attaching an accelerometer to the end effector in the direction normal to the de- 
sired motion of the tool, the normal position of the tool could be estimated. With this 
displacement estimate, corrective motions could be commanded to a compensation mech- 
anism. The compensation could occur internally as resolved displacements in the joints of 
the robot or an external device could be used to produce required displacement. For this 
application, the high speed and high resolution external compensator was used. 

To demonstrate its capabilities, the accelerometric compensation technique was first 
simulated with an ACSL program, using the dynamic model of the external compensator 
described earlier. A schematic representation of the compensator and servo can be seen in 
Figure 5.5. The simulated response of the system matched the actual servo system quite 
well. Step inputs were commanded to both the simulated model and the actual servo and 
the responses were nearly identical. The accurate model allows the response of the system 
to be accurately tested using various compensation techniques. 

The simulations introduced perturbations to the system as steps in acceleration. With- 
out compensation, this resulted in displacements of +/- 0.015 inch (0.38 mm). These dis- 
placements correspond to the displacements due to the poor straight line motions observed 
in Figure [4.27]. 

162 

C 

•H 

o 
cvJ" 

I — ■ 

Q 

o 

Un-Compensated 

Compensated 

o"n 

D.CO 0.^3 D.BD 1.20 

Time (second) 

i.60 

2.QC. 

Figure 5.6: Simulation of Accelerometric Compensation Using Ideal Integrators 

The first simulation, seen in Figure 5.6 was performed using ideal integrators, 1/s in 
the s domain. The compensation completely eliminated all traces of the positional errors 
caused by the step perturbations in accelerations. The response was perfect as expected, 
because the ideal double integration provided exact knowledge of the positional errors and 
the external servo was able to respond quickly enough to eliminate these errors. 

The simulation was repeated using more realistic integrators. These integrators in- 
cluded a variable time constant. Again in the s domain the integrator can be described 
by the following equation: 

n K 

(5.3) 

O 
I 

l + Ts 

where 

- is the output 

/ - is the input 

K - is the proportional gain 

T - is the integral time constant 

Both K and T are variables, where the integral time constant adjusts the control 
action. The inverse of the integral time T is called the reset rate and is related to the 
number of times that the proportional part of the control action is duplicated over a 
discrete time interval, [63]. By setting the time constant equal to one second for the next 
simulation, the control action is duplicated only one time per second. This results in a 
rather poor compensation as seen in Figure 5.7. 

163 

Un-Compensated 

O.CC 

G.^0 0.80 • r.2Q 1.60 

Time (second) 

2.00 

Figure 5.7: Simulation of Accelerometric Compensation Using an Integrator with a One 
Second Time Constant 

rJ" 

C 
-H 

o 

I — ■- 

o 

o-ffi-^ 

Un-Compensated 

Compensated 

O.DC 

C.«0 

0.82 

1.2Q 

1.60 

Time (second) 

Figure 5.8: Simulation of Accelerometric Compensation Using an Integrator With a Ten 
Second Time Constant 

A third simulation was performed, and in this instance the integral time constant 
was set equal to 10 seconds. The result as seen in Figure 5.8. provides nearly perfect 
compensation. The improvement over the previous simulation is due to the increased 
time constant, as the resulting reset rate increased to 10 times per second. 

As mentioned previously, the perturbation steps in acceleration, when integrated twice 
produce those trapezoidal shapes in displacement which were superimposed on the tool 
displacement paths seen in Figures 5.6 through 5.8. The overshoot at the beginning of 
the simulation demonstrates the step response of the simulated system. 

Because the simulation of this compensation method using accelerometric feedback 
was successful, it was determined that it should be developed and implemented on the 
T3-776. Accelerometric compensation has several other advantages in that it is a generic 

fca..t;j<tM<r.«;«. 

164 
solution and can be adapted to other robots, most of the necessary components were 
already developed and working, and this method could be implemented at a reasonable 
cost. 

Development of an Accelerometric Compensation Scheme 

In this section, the development of an accelerometric compensation scheme will be dis- 
cussed, including the design and testing of various analog integration circuits. Both analog 
and digital integration techniques were investigated. It was decided that an analog circuit 
would be developed to provide the integrations needed for the compensation technique. 
At the time, analog integration circuits appeared to be simple to build and implement. 

An example of the problems associated with digital integration techniques will be 
presented here. Both the trapezoidal rule and rectangle integration methods were used in 
the simulation programs described previously with excellent results. These methods are 
in fact recommended for infinite intervals of integration [64]. The excellent results of the 
simulation can be attributed to ideal input variables with zero DC offset. However, when a 
small DC bias was applied to the simulated accelerometer output, the system would soon 
saturate and the estimated position would 'run away'. Thus designs for analog integrators 
were developed. 

To produce design parameters for the analog integration system, an accurate repre- 
sentation of the poor straight line motion of the robot was necessary. The model was 
generated by commanding the robot to produce a straight line motion along an arbitrary 
straight path. For one particular experiment, the robot was commanded to repeat a 
straight line motion parallel to the Global Y axis, with the robot in a somewhat retracted 
configuration and a commanded velocity of 0.5 inch/second (12.5 mm/second). 

165 

Position of End Effector For Retracted Configuration 

Position (inches) Orientation (degrees) 

X 34.32 D 180 

Y -9.20 to 7.46 E 

Z 14.74 R 

A seismic accelerometer and a capacitive displacement probe were rigidly attached 
to the end effector of the robot. The accelerometer and displacement probe were located 
parallel to each other and normal to the desired trajectory of the end effector. A large-right 
angle mounting plate with machined surfaces was placed parallel to the desired trajectory 
of the end effector and within the operating range of the capacitive displacement probe, see 
Figure 5.9. Both the output of the accelerometer and capacitance probe were recorded on 
a real time data logger and the results for a 32 second duration are shown in Figure 5.10. 
To reveal a more detailed description of the motion and accelerations, the time scale of 
the previous figure was expanded, where the complete graph covers the motion during a 
one second time interval, in Figure 5.11. 

Observing Figures 5.10 and 5.11, a range of interest in the frequency domain spans from 
0.1 Hz to approximately 30 Hz. With this information, design criteria for the integrators 
was established. From previous work with integrators, it was obvious that DC noise at the 
input had to be eliminated so that the integrators would not saturate over an extended 
period of time. 

Thus, the first generation integrators were designed to incorporate a high pass filter, 
which would attenuate the DC components by using a corner frequency, Fc, of 0.1 Hz. 
Figure 5.12 is the schematic for the integrator and high pass filter built. It should be noted 
that the values for the resistors and capacitors were approaching the limit for standard 
off-the-shelf components. These combination Integrator/High Pass Filters, I/HPF, were 
tested by introducing a random noise signal to the input and monitoring the output. The 
random noise was generated by a GenRad spectrum analyzer, and the spectrum of the 
random noise was flat out to the desired high end of the frequency range, 30 Hz. 

166 

Motor 

Accelerometer 

External 
Compensator 

Capacitance\ 
Probe 

Conditioning 
Amplifier 

Charge 
Amplifier 

Figure 5.9: Method of Measuring Displacement and Acceleration of End Effector Normal 
to Desired Motion 

■" «ttji]|[||-i:iji.-3--i»iia(^i»<» 

Wi 

2.000 

RT INPUT LIN 
CH 3 
3X+ 
IN/SEC** 

-2.000 

0.0 
DISPLACEMENT 

LIN 

1 1 r- 

TIMECSEC) 

32.00 

0. 01600 

RT INPUT LIN 

CH i 

1X+ 

INCHES 

-0.01600 

LlJ^ 

-i I 1— 

VAs%v^^w^^ 

m 

I 

^V^ 

3.0 
TItlECSECJ: 22.87 

— ] 1 ; ; 1 — 

LIN TIME(SEC) 

RMPL: -0.7011 

i ARM? L 

-I 1 T" 

ir^ 

32.00 

Figure 5.10: Displacement and Acceleration Records of End Eifector Motions Normal to 
Desired Straight Line Path 

fiCCEL GUT 

. 000 

-I- 

RT INPUT LIN 

CH 3 

3X+ I 

IN/'SEC.*« 

.000 

MfW 

m 

p 

pWll 

^ 

ii: 

W 

i r- 

32.50 
DISPLFlCEMENT 

LIN 

IMECSEC) 

23.50 

0.0la00 

RT INPUT LIN 

CH 1 

1X+ 

INCHES 

0.0_ 

-XT^ 

jv7v;;^5£2ZV: 

-\r 

'Xr 

22.50 
TIME(SEC): 22. 4S 

1 j 1 

LIN TIME(SEC) 

flMPL: -0.2940 

1 RRM? r 

i r- 

^ 

23.50 

Figure 5.11: Expanded Time Scale of Previous Record, 22.5 to 23.5 Seconds 

168 

2.7M 

i-A/V-i 

.22uF 

H 

4.7uF O.luF 1M 

-AV 

Input 

Output 

77777 

Figure 5.12: Schematic of Initial Integrator/High Pass Filter 

The transfer function, in the form of a Bode diagram, between the input and output 
for two I/HPF in series was obtained with the spectrum analyzer. The results are shown 
in Figure 5.13. From the figure it is apparent that the response of the system is quite good 
for frequencies of 6 Hz or greater, the slope is linear and the phase is almost constant. 
But, frequencies from 0.1 Hz to 6 Hz are also of interest and the slope of the magnitude 
over this range was not linear and the phase angle was not constant, causing distortions 
in the desired output response. The distortions were caused by the effects from the HPF. 
Note that the HPF did attenuate the low frequency components, so that unwanted DC 
components would not cause the circuits to become saturated over an extended period of 
time. 

Ideally, a new I/HPF should be developed with a similar design, where the corner 
frequency would be shifted one decade lower, or set equal to 0.01 Hz. This would move 
the range of usable response down one decade also, so that the effective frequency range 
would span from 0.5 Hz up. Initially the proper components were not available to make 
the desired changes, so the integrator/filter was redesigned to accommodate the necessary 
changes. 

A new integrator was designed, specifically a low noise integrator with a designed 
corner frequency of 0.1 Hz. A high pass filter was not included in this design, but a 
second order low pass filter was introduced in series at the output of the integrator. The 

169 

Z -^ INTST./IMPUT 

_: I, I 1 

0.0 

- PHASE i 

DEGREES 

-3B0 . 

5.008 - 

FlV TF LOG 

CH 2/-CH 3 
1X+/3X+ 

VOLTS/VOLTS 

NflG 

5.0a0e-0- _ , , , I. , . , 

3.31000 
FREQCHZ): 0.0 

-1 — 1 — I I I I It — "" I I 1 I 1 
LOG rREQ(HZ) 100.0 

MflG: 0.07S36 PHASE: - 188.0 

1 ARM? I • ■ • ■ I • - -"H 

Figure 5.13: Transfer Function of Initial Integrator/High Pass Filter 

low pass filter had a corner frequency of approximately 15 Hz. The low pass filter was 
incorporated to improve the stabiUty of the external compensation servo loop. Figure 5.14 
provides a schematic of both the low noise integrator and the second order low pass filter. 

The combination low noise integrator and low pass filter was tested by again intro- 
ducing a random noise input with a flat spectrum up to 30 Hz. The Bode diagram of the 
transfer function, seen in Figure 5.15 shows the response of the system. The magnitude 
response is linear from 0.2 Hz to 13 Hz. The phase is not constant over the same range, 
but it is approximately constant from 0.2 Hz to 4 Hz. This does introduce some distortions 
in phase, but for a first compensation implementation, this system appeared acceptable. 

The original compensation scheme called for two integrators in series, so that positional 
commands could be directly sent to the compensator controller. However, the double 
integrators have a tendency to become unstable and quickly saturate because of DC bias 
voltages at the input. To eliminate this problem, a method which required only a single 
integrator was investigated. 

Looking at a simplified schematic representation of the external servo loop, it appeared 

170 

0.1uF 

6.8M 

7.0M 

A/V 

7.0M 

■Vv- 

Input 

.22uF 

0.68M 

AV 

27 K 

47K 

.22uF 

6.8M 

Output 

77777 

Figure 5.14: Schematic of Low Noise Integrator and Second Order Low Pass Filter 

0.0 

PHASE 
DEGREES 

INT CIR OUT/ INPUT 
_] 1 I I.I.I 

360.0 

200.0 

I=1V TF LOG 
CH A.-CH i 

VOLTS^VOLTS 

0.02000 

0.01003 
FREGCHZ): 23.50 

~1 I I 1 i ' I j ' I 1 i — 1 I I I 1 1 ^ J 1 — V-y^ 

LOG FREQCHZ) ' 100.0 

MF16: 0.1443 PHASE: -41.12 

2 asgiiGij-niizi] 

Figure 5.15: Transfer Function of Low Noise Integrator and Second Order Low Pass Filter 

171 

that only one integrator would be required if the compensation signal was introduced 
at the velocity feedback comparator. A single integration of an accelerometric output 
would result in a velocity term which could be introduced to the velocity loop of the 
motor controller. Utilizing a single integrator would reduce the chances of saturating the 
compensation circuit, thus improving the extended operation capabilities of the system. 

Implementation of an Accelerometric Compensation Scheme 

This section will describe the initial implementation and testing procedures used for 
the compensation scheme. A simple method was devised to accurately set the gain for the 
compensation servo mechanism. The calibration involved mounting a'horizontal cantilever 
beam with an adjustable mass to a rigid support. An accelerometer was mounted to the 
free end of the cantilever beam, see Figure 5.16. When the cantilever beam is excited, 
it produces a lowly damped sinusoidal output. Sinusoids are an excellent benchmark in 
determining the response of a servo system and are easily identifiable in real time data 
loggers (oscilloscopes, strip chart recorders, data analyzers). The output charge of the 
accelerometer is sent to a chai-ge amplifier and the amplifier output is then used as the input 
to the compensation circuit. In addition to the accelerometer, a capacitive displacement 
probe was mounted near the end of the cantilever beam so that the displacement of the 
beam could be accurately monitored. 

Another capacitive displacement probe was located on the end of the compensation 
servo slide mechanism, see Figure 5.16. This displacement probe would measure the 
displacement of the compensator table in relation to a fixed reference. This would provide 
a direct reading of the response of the positional servo loop and allow a comparison 
between the motion of the cantilever beam, as an input to the compensation system, and 
the motion of the slide mechanism, as the output of the compensation system. In addition, 
this would enable the compensation positional loop gain to be set accurately. 

Thus an uncoupled calibration method was developed. The system would run open 
loop and some of the inherent stability problems would be eliminated. The output of 

172 

External 
Compensator 

Accelerometer 
Capacitance 
Probe __,.^ m 
/-""""jjCanti lever be 

^Capacitance 
Probe 

Conditioning 
Amplifier 

n 

Charge 
Amplifier 

Motor 
Controller 

Figure 5.16: Calibration Set-Up For the Accelerometric Compensator 

DISPLACEMENT 

0.02SSa ' 

RT INPUT LIN ■ 

CH 1 

1X+ 

INCHES 

r\ ,", ^ r\ 

\j \y \y V' > 

-0.02009 

0.02000 

■i- 

■^. /"- A 

^ - V v/ k/ \J \/ \ - 

0.0 

DISP SLIDE 

LIN 

T 1 

TINECSECJ 

4.000 

RT INPUT LIN 

CH 2 

IX+ 

INCHES 

-0.02000 

J 

1 , — , . 

1 
r 

. 

A 

- 

J \J \J \J ' 

J'\J\J^^ 

— \j\j\J\jy\j\ 

1 -"■ -1 

- 

TIMECSEC): 0.0 

LIN TIt1ECSEC:i 

fiMPL: -1.731e-03 

r 

4.300 

173 

Figure 5.17: Displacement Record of Cantilever Beam and Compensation Servo - 4 Hz 

both displacement probes, along with the output of the accelerometer, were monitored 
and recorded by the GenRad. Initially problems were observed with the system when 
the compensator and the GenRad were both monitoring the output of the accelerometer. 
The problem was finally traced to the low impedance of the input of the GenRad data 
analyzer. After this problem was corrected, all three data signals could be recorded while 
the compensator was operational. 

The mass was adjusted on the cantilever beam so that when the beam was excited, 
the first mode of vibration occurred at 4 Hz. With the both displacement probes being 
displayed real time on the screen of the GenRad, the gain of the compensation circuit 
could be adjusted so that the displacement of the compensation slide would be equal to 
the displacement of the free end of the cantilever beam, (where the accelerometer was 
located). The top of Figure 5.17 depicts the measured displacement of the cantilever 
beam. The corresponding displacement of the slide table is shown at the bottom of 
Figure 5.17. Note that the input for the servo driven slide table is the integrated output 
of the accelerometer mounted on the end of the cantilever beam. The 'smooth' section 

DISP. 

B. 02039 

RT IiSPUT LIN 

CH 1 

3X+ 

INCHES 

-0.02000 _! 

-i 1 

t- .- . . . ^ 

1 

, 

'^^ /~v 

^'\ , 

/\ 

/\ /\ 

/\ /v 

- 

\l 

\ 

^/ \/ 

\/ 

\/ \ 

- 

—\ 

' 

' 1 

0.0 

LIN 

TlriE(SCC) 

4.000 

SLIDE DISP. 

1 

0.02000 

HI INPUT LIN 

CH 2 -"/^^ /-^"X 

3X+ r ^-^ ^ 

-x/\ / 

^^^ 

. / 

\/\/! 

INCHLb' 

V 

V V 

fV 

V ■ 

-a. 02000 _ 

I • 

1. 

i ' - 

0.0 

TiriECSEC): 0.0 

LIN FREQCHZ) 

fltlPL: 1.042e-03 

4.000 

174 

Figure 5.18: Displacement Record of Cantilever Beam and Compensation Servo - 2 Hz 

seen around the 2.0 second mark was caused by physically grabbing the cantilever for 
a moment and then re-exciting the cantilever beam. This was done to demonstrate the 
response of the system to a non-sinusoidal input. 

It should be noted that the displacement of the slide is shifted downward by a constant 
value and this effect is attributed to DC drifts in the compensation circuit. Remember 
that a high pass filter was not incorporated into this compensation circuit, allowing DC 
components to cause problems such as this. Overall, it appeared that this compensation 
method was quite good for the 4 Hz excitation. 

This experiment was repeated for a different sinusoidal frequency. The natural fre- 
quency of the cantilever beam was reduced to approximately 2 Hz by adding additional 
mass to the cantilever beam. The beam was excited, and again the displacements at both 
the end of the beam and the compensation slide were monitored and recorded, the top 
and bottom of Figure 5.18 respectively. The magnitude of the displacement was correct, 
but the phase was retarded by approximately 45 degrees. The phase shift would cause 
very poor compensation, so the cause of this phase shift was investigated. 

175 

Looking back at the transfer function of the combination integrator/low pass filter 
in Figure 5.15 a phase change of approximately 45 degrees at 2 Hz is evident. The 
somewhat poor phase characteristics of this circuit was traced to the low pass filter which 
was introduced to improve the stability of the system. The low pass filter was then 
removed from the circuit and the experiment was repeated. The results were favorable, 
with minimal phase shift and proper magnitude for the compensatory displacement. 

The feedback accelerometer was then moved from the cantilever beam to the compen- 
sator. The accelerometer was located parallel to the prismatic axis of the compensator, 
thus only motions normal to the desired trajectory of the tool path would be detected by 
the accelerometer. With the accelerometer rigidly attached to the frame of the external 
compensator, the positional loop of the compensator was closed. Remember that when 
the accelerometer was located on the cantilever beaiA, the system was operating in an 
open loop fashion. 

The capacitance probe which was rigidly attached to the slide of the external compen- 
sator measured the displacement of the slide with reference to the fixed right-angle bracket 
as described earlier. The end effector of the robot was excited by commanding the robot 
to move along a desired straight line path with a constant velocity. During the motion, 
the displacements and their resulting accelerations in the normal direction provided an 
input to the compensator. This provided a method to evaluate the closed response of the 
compensator. However, the system became unstable and quickly caused the servomotor 
of the external compensator to accelerate to its maximum velocity and continue to rotate 
at that speed until it was manually disabled. 

To determine the cause of this instability, the output of the accelerometer was directed 
to the GenRad dynamic analyzer, the compensation servo and robot servos were deacti- 
vated, and the end effector of the robot was struck with a rubber mallet. The resulting 
output revealed a dominant 23.5 Hz natural frequency of the compensator when mounted 
on the robot. This natural frequency was somewhat position independent, in that the 
test was repeated in several different configurations and the natural frequency remained 

LG fiCCL 

1.0QO 

RT SPEC LIN 
CH i 
3X+ 
1N/S«*2 

0.8 

r 

1 1 1 

1 1 . 

■ 

- 

- 

- 

j\ 

- 

' _^ . _ - . 

-A-Av ^.. 

* 

^ A- ^ — . ..^ 
1 

Av/A„,.| 

1.000 

INT CIR OUT 

LIN 

FREQCHZ) 

1.000 

RT SPEC LIN - 
CH 4 
4X + 
IN.'SXHeS 

0.0. 

-/'- 

i^ 

■^^- .^ 

I 

-I- 

1.000 
FREQCHZ): 24.00 

LIN FREOCHZ) 
f=iMPL: 0.G437 

BssgLig: 

50.03 

AJt^ 

50.00 

176 

Figure 5.19: Effect of Notch Filter in Reducing Natural Frequency Component at 23.5 Hz 

within a +/- 0.5 Hz range of 23.5 Hz. A notch filter was designed and built to eliminate 
the effects of this system's natural frequency. The top of Figure 5.19 shows the response 
of the end effector after being struck. The tuned notch filter was then used to eliminate 
the dominant natural frequency and the result can be seen in the bottom of Figure 5.19. 
The notch filter completely eliminates the effects of 23.5 Hz frequency. 

The notch filter was then connected serially to the input of the existing low noise 
integrator described earlier. The transfer function for this combination of notch filter and 
integrator can be seen in Figure 5.20. Note the excellent phase response, almost constant 
over the frequency range between 0.5 and 15 Hz. The system was then tested, where the 
end effector was excited by a blow from the rubber mallet. The closed loop system did 
not become unstable, but little improvement from the compensator was evident, as the 
record of the compensated straight line motion revealed deviations from the desired path 
of up to +/- 0.008 inch (0.203 mm). 

The accelerometer was moved from the compensator back to the cantilever beam in 
hopes of identifying the causes for the lack of improvement when using the compensator. 

177 

0.0 

INT CIR OUT-'IMPUT 
■ 1 ... .1 

PHfiSE i 
DEGREES 

-360.0 

10.30 

flV Tr LOG 

CH 4xCh' 1 
4X+/3X+ 

VOLTS/VOLTS 

MflG 

1 . 000e-03 ^ 

— I — -^ 1 1 I TTT 

0.01000 
FREQCHZ): 23.50 

I I I I I 1 1 ■ — I 1 — 1 — I I I J i| ' I t r-T- 

L06 FREQCHZ) 100. Q 

MRG: 2.7Sle-a3 PHRSE: - 36.30 

2 ijEsnGsnmiii 

Figure 5.20: Transfer Function of Low Noise Integrator and Notch Filter 

With the open loop control reinstated, the gains for the compensator could be rechecked 
and adjusted if necessary. The cantilever beam had weights attached which would produce 
a 2 Hz natural frequency when excited. The displacements of both the cantilever beam 
and the slide of the compensator were again recorded, see Figure 5.21. The magnitude of 
the displacement was correct, but there was a phase shift of approximately 90 degrees. 

The cause of this phase shift was not immediately apparent. Then, realizing that an 
additional integrator would provide the needed 90 degree phase shift, the equations of 
the servo control loop were re-investigated. A simplified block diagram of the position 
controlled servomotor with accelerometric compensation is presented in Figure 5.22. The 
transfer function for the system is written as: 

S^ -[■ KyKrriHvS + KpKyKm 

where 

Xa{s) - actual position of device 
Kp - positional gain of servo 

178 

DISPLACEMENT 

1 1 

' 

' 

Q.020B0 

. 

RT INPUT LIM 
CH 1 
3X + 

^^ 

^____ 

^^—--^ 

"-^. 

- 

INCH 

^ 

/ 

""- 

' 

-0.02000 

- 

1 

' 

1 

' 

0.0 

SLIDE DI3P. 

0.02300 

RT INPUT LIN 
CH 2 

INCHES 

-0.02000 _L 

1 ■ \ 

0.0 
TIMECSECl: 0.1B75 

LIN TIMe(SEC) 

LIN TinECSEC) 

ftMPL: 5.922e-03 

G 

i . 000 

1.000 

Figure 5.21: Open Loop Response of Compensator with Single Integrator and Notch Filter 

Xd(s) ': 

1/s 

+ 

Kp 

1/s 

Ae(s) 

V J 

Kv 

Km 

1/s 

1/s 

+ *^Qy 

_ / 

\ 

Hv 

Xa{s) 

Figure 5.22: Simplified Block Diagram of Accelerometric Compensation 

179 

Ky - velocity gain of servo 

K-rn - gain of servo motor 

Ki - double integrator gain 

K2 - single integrator gain 

Hy - tachometer feedback gain 

Xdis) - desired position of compensator 

Ae{s) - acceleration of the displacement error, Pg 

The second term in the numerator is from the double integrator and is inserted at the 
summing junction of the positional loop. The third term in the numerator is from the 
single integrator and is introduced to the velocity loop of the controller. The acceleration 
of a displacement error can be represented by the following equation: 

A,{s) = Xe{s) * s^ (5.5) 

where 

Ae{s) - acceleration of the displacement error in the normal direction 
Xe{s) - positional error in the 's' domain 

Now, if the expression for Ae{s) from Equation 5.5 is substituted into Equation 5.4 
and simplified, one obtains: 

Y (,. iI^VivKm)Xd{s) + {KxK^KyK^)X,{s) + {K 2KvKm)sP,{s) 

s^ + KyR^HyS + KphyA^ 

Observe the last term in the numerator, it is the term which was incorporated into the 

accelerometric compensation scheme using the single integrator at the velocity loop of the 

servo controller. The additional 's' is the term which caused the 90 degree phase shift 

seen earlier. Thus, it is apparent that if an accelerometer is to be used in observing the 

normal positional error, a double integrator will be required. The middle term, which 

includes the double integrator, has the same gain as the desired position input, Xd- This 

would enable the servo to respond to the errors in position, X^ in the same manner as 

the desired input. For a well tuned servo, the response to the errors in position should be 

excellent. But the problems associated with double integrators remain. 

180 

0.0- 

OUTPUT^INPUT 

1 L_,, , 1 ,,,, 

I. . , 1 

, 1 , . . , 

1 , ■ , ■ 

llll 

1 

~ 

PHRSc - 

-^-_^| jl 

- 

. i ' —J . 

1 i- 

-3S0.a • 

I 

1 ; — i_l 11,1 

llll 

- 

r' -1 1 11.11 

a. 50Q0 ; 

^ 

CH 2-'CH 1 J 
3X+/-3X+ 3 

vni TRxvni jq I 

\^ 

I 

r 

MRG 1 

"^ 

-i-i-,n,Liii 

j 

c 

f 

5.a00e-35 5 1 

1 

E 

1 . .111111 
0.01003 
FREQCHZ): 0.3688 

LOG 
MfiG: 

1 1 r 1" 1 r 

0.040 
1 

■ . r-i— r 
FREQCKZ) 
25 

-T-rrri 

PHASE: 

"I 1 — 1~ i"ri'i r 

130.0 
-259.4 

c 

. . . 1 . . . 

-1 

Figure 5.23: Transfer Function of the Improved Integrator/High Pass Filter 

A new pair of integi'ators were designed, built and tested. Again they incorporated 
low noise integrators with high pass filters, but this time the corner frequency was shifted 
to 0.05 Hz. This was accomplished by experimenting with several types of capacitors and 
by arranging them in various combinations, the corner frequency was shifted one decade 
lower from the previous 0.5 Hz (as seen in Figure 5.13). The response of the integrator 
was quite good. There was little phase shift encountered above 0.5 Hz, and the magnitude 
response was linear down to 0.3 Hz, see Figure 5.23. 

Even with the high pass filter attenuating the DC components, an input voltage bias 
circuit had to be included to help reduce the chance of saturating the integrator. Because 
integrators are basically low pass filters, the output from these devices are also attenuated. 
To amplify the output of these circuits to the level as required by the compensation servo 
amplifier, additional op-amp circuits were introduced in series as lOX amplifiers. Both 
integrators had to be 'tuned' individually, that is, the potentiometer which controlled the 
bias voltage had to be carefully adjusted. The DC component could be reduced to less 
than a millivolt when the input to the circuit was grounded. 

181 

OUTPUT/INPUT 

■ J 1 1 L 

— 1 — 1 1 1 

J 

1 , ' 1 ' 1 r r 

, 

/-----. 

r 

PHP.SE - 

/ 

~^-— } 

/ 

1 

! 

^^if- 

-3S3.0 - 

"~^--^' 

i 

L 

1__ 1 1 1 , , r , 

1 1 1 1 I 1 1 ^ 1 1 

-1 1 1 III;' 

AV TF LOG _ 

~^ 

"^ ! 

CH 2,'CH 1 : 

3X+.'2X+ ; 
VOLTS.--VQLTS - 

r 

V 

f 

r 

f\RG ; 

■ L 

1 

\f 

5.a00e-as 5 

1 

111- 

FREQCHZ): 

3.31000 
3.9688 

' ' ' ' i 

LOS 
MfiG; 

FREOCHZ) 
l.Eaie-03 

2 C 

PHfiSE: 

T 1 1 1 1 iT' 

10.013 

-158.4 
1 

Figure 5.24: Transfer Function of Improved Double Integrator Circuit 

A transfer function of tlie double integrator circuit incorporating high pass filters, lOX 
amplifiers and bias voltage circuits was produced by introducing a random noise signal to 
the input and monitoring both the input and the output of the circuit with the GenRad. 
This can be seen in Figure 5.24. The excellent response of the double integrator circuit is 
due to the ideal conditions during the experiment. The noise generator used to produce 
the input signal to the integrator produced zero DC bias voltage, which reduced the 
chances of saturation and allowed the sampling to continue over a period of 30 seconds. 
The operational frequency range was useful down to approximately 0.6 Hz. At frequencies 
below 0.6 Hz, the phase shift starts to introduce errors to the system. Even though the 
corner frequency of the circuit was forced down to 0.05 Hz, the useable range was reduced 
because of the physical properties of the components. The 'noise' in the transfer function 
of frequencies higher than 5 Hz is due to signal to noise level being reduced at 40 db per 
decade due to the attenuation from the integrators. 

At this point, the output of the accelerometer attached to the cantilever beam was 
directed to the input of the double integration circuit. The beam was excited and oscillated 

182 

100K 

Input 

6.8M 
~82uf" 

4.7uF 4.1 M 

— IHh^W 

.22uF 

6.8M 
~82uF 

4.7uF 4.1 M 

— IHh-VvH 

.22uF 

Output 
5.3M 

Figure 5.25: Schematic of Double Integrator Circuit 

at its natural frequency of 2 Hz. Within 2 seconds, the circuit was saturated at 12 
volts, the supply voltage. The input of the circuit was again grounded and the bias 
voltage circuits individually adjusted so that the circuit was stable and had an output of 
approximately zero volts. The accelerometer was reattached and the beam was excited. 
Almost immediately, the circuit was saturated again. This process was repeated several 
times, with minor modifications made to the circuit, but the result was the same. The 
circuit would consistently saturate within 5 seconds. 

It should be noted that the double integrator circuit approached the limits of normal 
circuit components. The design of the circuit meets the original requirements of the in- 
tegrator established at the beginning of the experiment, wide bandwidth, low frequency 
response, DC attenuation, and low frequency distortion in the required bandwidth. How- 
ever, when the circuit was connected to the accelerometer, the circuit would continue to 
saturate. The cause of this DC bias in the accelerometer is unknown, but perhaps it could 
be traced and eliminated. 

A final double integration technique was tested, a double integrator on a single chip. 
By utilizing this technique, it was thought that the problems associated with input DC 
bias voltages and saturation would be reduced. Figure 5.25 shows the schematic of the 

183 
double integrator. Reducing the circuit, the following transfer function can be derived: 

Setting R — Imfi and C — 0.5/iF, the corner frequencies are equal to 0.5 Hz. Again, this 
corner frequency is approximately a decade too high, but this is a good starting point. The 
circuit was assembled, and a precision low noise op-amp was used. The input was grounded 
and the circuit activated. Almost immediately, the output was saturated. Several other 
modifications were made to the circuit with no improvement. Out of curiosity, the values 
of R and C were experimented with. When the values for R and C were chosen so that 
the corner frequencies equaled 10 Hz, the system functioned as desired; however, this 
frequency was much higher than required. 

The analog system is limited by the corner frequency of the integrator. For the purposes 
of compensation, the corner frequency must be low; however, saturation occurs at these 
low frequencies. It is apparent that either a much more elaborate analog integration circuit 
is required, or that a dedicated digital system should be developed. 

Accelerometric Compensation Conclusions 

In theory, compensation of straight line motion errors using accelerometric techniques 
appears to be a straight forward, easily implementable task. Simply by double integrating 
the output of an accelerometer, the positional error information is recovered. However, 
in the practical sense, double integration of the accelerometer signals is a difficult task, 
because of the low frequencies involved. 

In the early 1960's, eloquent analog integration techniques were developed for shock 
and vibration analysis. They reached similar limitations to what was encountered by the 
research described previously. The integrators were limited to short durations (less than 
one second) for real time analysis, and for extended duration requirements, non real time 
operation was imposed, [62]. These systems incorporated high pass filters to eliminate the 
saturation effects due to DC contamination, thus the low frequency signals (below 10 Hz) 
were attenuated or distorted. 

184 

The requirements for accelerometric compensation of the industrial robot are quite 
difficult to meet because they include: 

• real time operation 

• wide dynamic range (0.5 Hz to 30 Hz) 

• able to operate near DC 

• produce low phase distortion 

At this point in time, it is apparent that a different type of integrator should be 
produced. There are basically two choices, either develop a more sophisticated analog 
circuit or design a digital integrating device. The analog integrator circuit developed by 
Oleson [62] might be adequate for a prototype design. The integrator described by Oleson 
incorporates a very stable voltage controlled oscillator supplying a series of fixed charges 
to an integrating capacitor. The long time average of the capacitor voltage is held at zero 
by a feedback circuit. Perhaps twenty year old technology could be re-introduced to solve 
a modern problem. 

Another method would require the development of a digital integrator. Similar prob- 
lems analogous to the saturation problem in the analog circuit might be eliminated by 
incorporating the proper digital filtering techniques. The digital filtering technology has 
to be studied further before a successful system can be developed. 

Once the proper positional command is obtained, whether it be from analog or digital 
methods (or a combination of both), it appears that the external compensator performs 
quite well as seen in Figures 5.17 and 5.18. The results of direct displacement feedback 
also demonstrates the capability of the external compensator. Once the positional error is 
provided, the compensator can effectively eliminate the normal errors of the tool trajectory. 
By concentrating efforts on developing a double integration technique which effectively 
provides the necessary error displacement input, this method of improving straight line 
motion or smooth motion should be successful. 

To improve the smooth motion capabilities of the robot, the resultant accelerations 
due to a desired change in direction must be kept under the corner frequency of the system 

185 

integrators. Otherwise, the accelerations due to changes in tlie normal tool direction will 
have adverse effects on the position of the tool. For straight line motions this is not a 
concern, because any accelerations detected in the normal direction indicate a path error 
at the tool. 

CHAPTER 6 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 

The need of improving the motion capabilities of robots is evident in the number of 
difficult tasks that industrial robots are now required to perform. In many of these new 
applications, the performance requirements may exceed the capabilities of the robot. For 
example, precision machining applications require the position of the tool be accurately 
controlled and currently this is accomplished by using rigid templates to guide the robot 
over the necessary path. A different template must be manufactured for each different type 
of part. These templates, while providing absolute positioning capabilities for the robot, 
are expensive to produce and limit the flexible manufacturing capabilities of the robot. 
To increase the economy of the robots in precision machining applications, rigid templates 
should be eliminated and be replaced by alternate compensation methods. Several prac- 
tical methods have been presented which help to improve the motion capabilities of an 
existing industrial robot including: dynamic compensation for changes in load torques, 
flexibility compensation of the robot structure, and accelerometric compensation to im- 
prove the straight line motion capabilities of the robot. 

Most robots provide reasonably good repeatability, which is related to the relative 
accuracy of the robot. The Cincinnati Milacron T3-776 for example has a stated repeata- 
bility of -I-/-0.010 inch (0.25 mm) through out a 1000 cubic foot (8.63 cubic m) work 
volume. To take advantage of the repeatability of the robot motion, the motions of the 
robot are typically taught on-line with teach pendants. However, the repeatability is af- 
fected if external influences occur, ie. forces applied to the end effector cause the tool to 
be displaced more than the stated repeatabihty. 

Many modern CADCAM tools provide not only a design environment, but provide 
tool coordinates for Computer Numerical Controlled (CNC) machine tools as well. This 
allows the tool path to be developed off-line and transmitted to the machine tool without 

186 

187 

having to be taught manually. For many CNC machine tools this method of developing the 
tool path off-line is completely satisfactory, because the absolute positioning capabilities 
of these machines are within the design specifications of the component to be machined, 
on the order of 0.0001 inch (0.0025 mm). 

However, for some large or complex three dimensional components, the traditional 
CNC machines lack the reach or dexterity to perform the required machining operation. 
Thus, robots might be substituted for these difficult applications. Ideally, manufacturers 
wish to utilize robots in a similar manner as traditional machine tools, including the off- 
line generation of tool coordinates. However, as mentioned previously, the repeatability 
of the robot is approximately two orders of magnitude worse than traditional machine 
tools. The absolute accuracy of robots is worse. It is evident that the motion quality of 
the robot has to be improved. Thus factors which produce errors must be identified and 
corrected. 

Typical error sources are listed in the following table with the categories in a somewhat 
descending order of importance. Note that these sources of error are general and may not 
apply to every robot or application. Asterisks are used to denote the error sources. 

Robot Error Sources As Related 
To Various Modes Of Operation 

Sources 

Point 

Path 

of Error 

Absolute 

Relative 

Absolute 

Relative 

Flexiblity 

* 

+ 

+ 

* 

Dynamic 

+ 

* 

Geometry 

* 

* 

Sensor 

* 

* 

* 

* 

Computation 

+ 

* 

+ 

Environment 

+ 

+ 

+ 

* 

Point describes the position and orientation of a single point in the robot workspace, 
where path describes a trajectory which the robot is programmed to follow. Absolute 
refers to the absolute position of the robot in the robot's global coordinate system, and 
relative denotes any frame of reference in the robots workspace. Accuracy in the absolute 

188 

positioning of the robot is required for robots whicli are taught off-line. The relative accu- 
racy is easier to meet, because the robot is usually taught on-line with a teach pendent for 
these applications. FlexibiUty deals with the flexibility of the structure, Dynamic involves 
the dynamic response of the system, Geometry deals with the errors in the kinematic 
equations of motion. Sensor deals with errors introduced by the sensors, Compututation 
deals with path errors due to computational roundoff and Environment is related to the 
impacts of environment on the robot accuracy, such as temperature and humidity. 

For the particular application of robot edge milling, relative path accuracy was deter- 
mined to be the major concern. The errors due to flexibility were modeled and compen- 
sated for, and a dynamic compensation technique was developed and successfully demon- 
strated. The errors due to sensors, computer round off and interpolation, and environmen- 
tal factors were lumped into a single compensation technique, improving the straight line 
motion of the robot. Accelerometric compensation techniques were pursued to improve 
the straight line performance of the robot, but they were not entirely successful. 

Absolute path accuracy will become more important as oiT-line programming tech- 
niques are implemented more often. The major factors which currently affect the absolute 
accuracy of the robot include: deflection of the robot structure under applied loads, geo- 
metric errors due to differences between the actual kinematic description of the robot and 
the kinematic model used to drive the robot and errors of motion due to ignored dynamic 
influence coefficients of motion in the robot controller. It is apparent that these three 
factors compose a majority of the errors in motion of the robot. By eliminating these 
particular errors, it may be possible to increase the absolute accuracy to within the rated 
repeatabiUty of the robot. For many applications, this will provide sufficient accuracy to 
meet the design speciflcations. 

When this work was originally undertaken, errors due to structural flexibilities and the 
poor dynamic response of the robot appeared to be the most influential factors. While the 
particular task of measuring the geometric errors directly was not undertaken, methods to 
improve the dynamic response of the system and reduce errors due to structural flexibilities 

189 

were accomplished. 

In the second chapter, several dynamic control methods and compensation schemes 
were discussed. An innovative direct dynamic compensation scheme developed by Van 
Brussel was modified so. that it could be implemented on an existing robot without making 
major modifications to the robot or its controller. The observed dynamic compensation 
scheme was simulated, developed and successfully implemented on the base axis of the 
T3-776 robot. The base was chosen because the inertial load at the base may change in 
a ratio of 12:1 depending on the configuration of the robot. The scheme did improve the 
response of the system somewhat, but with the large gear reduction used in the base, the 
effect of the improvement on the base was limited. 

However, for robots with low gear reductions, or direct drive robots, this method of 
dynamic compensation would be useful and practical for several reasons. The observed 
compensation method does not require a detailed dynamic model of the robot, eliminating 
the need of a dedicated computer to calculate the influence coefBcients of the dynamic 
equation of motion. Additionally, strain gauges or other force/torque measuring devices 
are not required for each link of the robot, as they would be in direct dynamic compensa- 
tion. 

For linear or easily modeled motor controllers, the observed compensator may be a sim- 
ple analog circuit. For more complex motor controllers, a digital or hybrid analog/digital 
controller might be used instead. By increasing the accuracy of the model of the motor and 
controller in the compensator, the effects of external load perturbations can be eliminated 
with greater precision. Models of permanent magnet DC motors are quite generic and 
the values for the necessary parameters are provided by the manufacturer or are obtained 
through some simple modeling techniques. The models of the motor controllers are more 
complicated. There are similarities between various types of controllers, and a general 
model of the controller could be used and modified as required. 

The response of the motor and controller was measured and an accurate model of the 
base servo was developed. The analog circuit of the compensator used a simple fijced gain 

190 

amplifier to model the non-linear motor controller. The observed compensation scheme 
demonstrated approximately a 40% improvement over the same case without compensa- 
tion. If the compensator had incorporated a more accurate model of the controller, an 
even greater improvement may have been achieved. Additionally, the current limits of 
the controller reduce the ability of the compensator to exactly eliminate all external dis- 
turbances. This will be true of all practical dynamic compensation techniques or torque 
control schemes, the ultimate limiting factor is the peak current available from the motor 
driver. 

As seen in the simulations, by providing accurate models of the motor and controller to 
the compensator, the effects of external torque perturbations can be completely eliminated 
in the ideal case, or greatly reduced in the more realistic simulation. In the case of the 
T3-776 robot, the base axis incorporates such a high gear ratio that the effects of external 
loads applied to the end-effector make little difference to the response of the servo. 

However other devices, which incorporate low gear reductions and incur large changes 
in load, may be greatly enhanced by this compensation method. An example of this would 
be the active table of a milling machine, where a heavy workpiece, mounted to the table 
is machined to approximately 10% of its original mass. Obviously, the response of the 
machine would change as the mass of the workpiece changed unless compensation was 
used. For this and other robotic applications, it is felt that the development of observed 
dynamic compensation should be pursued. 

A hybrid design appears to-be the most practical, where the- analog component would 
be used as the external load torque observer and the servo controller would be modeled 
by a digital circuit. The digital portion would be based on a dedicated micro-processor 
which could be programmed to emulate the non-linearities of the controller. This low 
cost system could be modified to operate on most servo controllers with minor software 
changes. The hard interfaces would include current and velocity inputs from the motor 
and a voltage output from the compensator. 

The next area of concern was the elimination of path errors due to deflections of the 

191 

robot structure. The flexibility model of the robot was developed by Stern [8]. This 
flexibility model was used to predict the deflection of the robot by actively measuring 
the applied loads. Because the flexibility of the robot was position dependent, both the 
position of the robot and the applied forces must be known at any given time to accurately 
calculate the displacement of the robot. Once the normal displacement of the tool is 
calculated, the tool must be moved by that amount to eliminate the error. 

An alternative to developing the complete flexibility model of the structure would be to 
statically measure the flexibility of the robot along the desired path at standard intervals. 
For an application where the displacements are required for all six degrees-of-freedom, 
this would become an arduous task. However for the edge milling application, only the 
deflections affecting the normal displacement must be found. Two forces affect the normal 
displacement, the normal and tangential cutting forces. The following equation represents 
this modeling task: 

Dn = FLEXn*Fn + FLEXt*Ft (6.1) 

The term Dn represents the deflection in the normal direction, FLEXn and FLEXt 
represent the normal and tangential flexibilities and Fn and Ft represent the normal and 
tangential cutting forces. The flexibility values would be found by applying forces in first 
the normal and then tangential directions and measuring the normal displacement in each 
case. The flexibility values would be recorded for each measured position, and recalled 
at the proper time. This method may be practical only in instances where the proper 
flexibility modeling knowledge and tools were missing or only a limited number of tool 
paths are required. 

,1 There are three methods which can be used to provide the necessary displacement to 

compensate for the deflections in the robot structure. The first method involves using the 
robot to produce the compensatory displacement. This method requires that the computed 
displacement at the tool be back transformed to joint coordinates. The compensation 
displacement must then be added to the original desired displacement at that joint in real 
time. A good understanding of the robot controller is necessary so that the displacements 

192 

may added. The quality of the compensation is dependent on the speed which the joint 
servo can respond to the additional displacement command. For most large robots, the 
response of the servo is too slow to provide effective compensation. The second method 
involves mounting the workpiece on an active holder which is able to produce the necessary 
compensation displacements. However, this active holder may require up to six active 
degrees-of-freedom to provide the proper compensation. And for heavy or large workplaces, 
the size and performance required of the workpiece holder may become too great for a 
practical system. The final method uses a high speed, high resolution active end effector. 
Once the normal deflection displacement is calculated, this value is sent to an external 
compensator. The compensator then directly responds to this input. This method does 
not require back transformations, in depth software knowledge of the robot controller, or 
rely on the dynamic response of the robot servos for the necessary real time compensation. 

For the particular application of edge milling sheet metal components, only a single 
degree-of-freedom device is required to eliminate the errors caused by the robot deflections. 
A high speed actuator was designed and the device could provide a displacement with 
+/- 0.0005 inch (0.013 mm) resolution. A six degree-of-freedom force/torque transducer 
incorporating a strain bridge was used to provide the necessary force information. The 
external compensator uses a standard Personnel Computer for the real time control of the 
actuator. This results in a inexpensive, stand-alone system which could be easily adapted 
to a number of industrial robots. By providing the proper displacement input, digital or 
analog, the actuator can quickly and accurately respond. 

During the experimentation, the flexibility matrices for specific positions of the robot 
were manually put into the controlling computer. For a more practical implementation, 
the position of the robot should be monitored in real time, and from the position of the 
robot, the flexibility matrix could be updated as required. New software releases from 
Cincinnati Milacron allow the position of the robot in either joint or global coordinates to 
be down loaded to a PC or DEC computer in a real time manner. This should be included 
in future updates of the flexibility compensation scheme. 

193 

For the flexibility compensation, two types of tests were made, static and dynamic. For 
the static tests, various loads were applied to the end effector, the loads were measured 
by the force/torque sensor and multiplied by the position dependent flexibility matrix. 
The product was the compensation displacement, which was converted to analog signal 
to drive the compensator. Displacements of up to 0.030 inch (0.76 mm) for a 40 pound 
(18.2 Kg) static load were reduced to 0.002 inch (0.05 mm). By improving the flexibility 
model of the robot, it is possible to further reduce the deflection error. For example, the 
flexibility matrix was slightly modified by trial and error until the static deflections were 
completely eliminated. 

Dynamic cutting tests were then performed. Simple straight line paths were pro- 
grammed. Steps were premachined into the workpiece to provide changes in the cutting 
force. For the paths chosen, both the measured and calculated flexibility matrices changed 
very little, less than 15%. A single flexibility matrix was used to represent the complete 
path. The results revealed that the uncompensated displacements normal to the desired 
path resulted in errors of up to 0.015 inch (0.38 mm), and with the compensator active, 
these errors were reduced to approximately 0.007 inch (0.18 mm). The improvement may 
have been more evident had the Metal Removal Rate (MRR) been greater, resulting in 
a greater applied force to the system. In any case, errors of this magnitude are still too 
great to allow templateless edge milling unless additional compensation techniques are 
imposed. 

A majority of the path errors in the compensated trial may be attributed to the 
poor straight line performance of the robot. The poor straight line motion is due to 
a combination of factors including sensors, computer round off and interpolation, and 
environmental factors. A compensation technique was developed which addressed these 
error sources as a group. A record of one of the straight line paths was made without any 
externally applied loads, and tl;e resulting profilograms revealed normal displacements 
from the desired path of up to +/- 0.010 inch (0.25 mm). It is apparent that to provide 
the necessary surface quality, the straight line motion has to be improved. In the final 

194 

chapter, methods of improving the straight line motion of the robot were discussed. 

Several techniques were explored, but an accelerometric technique was chosen because 
of its perceived simplicity. By attaching an accelerometer to the tool in the direction 
normal to the desired tool path, displacements normal to the tool path can be ideally 
observed. This method requires the double integration of the accelerometric signal. The 
requirements made for the integrators were an operating bandwidth between 0.5 and 30 
Hz with minimal phase distortion, and most importantly the circuits should be designed 
so they do not saturate. These requirements appear to contradict with one another. 

To reduce the possibility of saturation, high pass filters were introduced to the input 
of the integrators. This effectively attenuates the low frequency components, however, the 
high pass filter introduced an unwanted phase distortion in the transfer function. The high 
pass filters were thus eliminated. Low pass filters with a corner frequency of approximately 
20 Hz were then introduced to eliminate unwanted noise from the system. However, these 
too introduced phase distortion in the system, but the phase distortion between 1 and 
5 Hz was small. This circuit was selected for compensation. 

The accelerometer was attached to the external compensator and an impulse force was 
applied to the robot in the normal direction of the tool. This caused the external servo to 
become unstable. The cause of this instability was traced to the first mode of vibration 
of the external compensator in the normal direction, which occurred at 23.5 Hz. A notch 
filter was designed and introduced to the system to attenuate this mode of vibration. This 
allowed the low pass filter and its associated phase shift to be eliminated from the circuit. 
Initially, it appeared that a single integrator could be used if its output was introduced 
to the velocity input of the servo, integrating acceleration signal once produces a velocity 
signal. The resulting experiments revealed an excellent reproduction of various frequency 
sinusoidal inputs by the external servo, but a 90 degree phase shift was present. After 
examining the transfer function of the servo it became apparent that a single integration 
of the input signal would not provide the necessary output from the external servo and 
double integration was indeed required. 

195 

A series of experiments finally led to the development of an integrator which met all 
of the original requirements. The integrator incorporated a low frequency, high pass filter 
to attenuate DC bias voltages. The corner frequency of the filter was equal to 0.05 Hz, 
and the components used to build the circuit approached the limits of real components, 
for example 10 megaohm resistors and 100 microfarad capacitors. Two of these integrator 
circuits were built, and the resulting transfer function appeared to meet the required 
integration specifications quite well. Linear response from 0.5 Hz and constant phase shift 
from approximately 1.0 Hz. Most importantly, the circuit did not saturate. However, 
when the circuit was connected to the accelerometer, the circuit would quickly saturate. 
A stray DC voltage was creating the failure. DC bias circuits were introduced, and the 
circuit was carefully adjusted, but the system would continue to saturate. 

Perhaps a more experienced designer could develop a circuit which automatically ad- 
justs the voltage bias circuit so any stray DC signal can be attenuated. Another path 
would be to develop a digital integration circuit or perhaps a hybrid digital/analog cir- 
cuit. Special digital filtering techniques might be employed to eliminate these problems. 

It is evident that once the external compensator receives the necessary input, the 
system can respond and greatly improve the motion of the tool. For example, a capacitance 
probe, used to measure the normal deflection of the robot was used as an input to the 
external compensator. The charge amplifier of the capacitance probe produces a voltage 

,111 

1 proportional to the displacement of the probe. This analog signal was connected to the 

input of the external servo, and displacements normal to the desired path were reduced by 

I one order of magnitude. The deflections when compensated in this manner were reduced 

to -H/- 0.002 inch (0.05 mm) or less. 

At this time, it may be useful to look at alternate methods which provide a measure 
of the deflection displacement. Several closed form solutions were explored, where the po- 
sitional error could be directly measured, not estimated as in the flexibility compensation 
or observed as in the accelerometric compensation method. The closed form solution has 
the advantage of including all sources of error, regardless of their origin. The rigid tem- 

196 

plate method provides a mechanical closed form solution, where the errors are eliminated 
because the tool is guided by a rigid mechanical reference. 

The most obvious closed form compensation method would be to use a displacement 
probe to measure the normal displacement of the tool from a fixed reference. With the 
error known, the compensator would be commanded to produce this displacement, thus 
eliminating the normal error. For straight line motions, this is a trivial task, just clamp 
a strait edge to the workpiece at the appropriate position for the reference. For complex, 
three dimensional components, the reference edge would need the same contour, requiring 
difficult machining of the reference edge. Thus, a special 'reference' template would have 
to be manufactured for each part, as was provided for the mechanical template. 

A second direct measurement scheme would require that the tool path be scribed 
directly on the workpiece, eliminating the need of a template to directly guide the robot. 
Vision systems could easily detect and follow the scribed mark on the workpiece. The 
vision hardware would be located in the same PC as the servo control system. This 
system could provide updated position commands to the servo at approximately 60 Hz. 
But alas, another form of 'scribing' template or guide would be required when marking 
the path on the workpiece. 

The closed form solutions, when coupled with the high speed external compensating 
servo, have several advantages over other compensation methods: they eliminate all types 
of path errors regardless of their cause, they provide real time displacement measure- 
ment and compensation, they are generic and can be applied to any robot, they are self 
contained and they do not require communications with other systems (ie. the robot con- 
troller), and they require no knowledge of the robot they are attached to (ie. flexibility 
model). However, these closed form solutions require that the tool path or a reference 
path be provided for all motions requiring compensation. This means a form of template 
is required for each closed form method. Elimination of the template was one of the 
original requirements. 

A final pseudo closed form compensation method was investigated. It used a high 

197 

resolution, real time tracking device to locate the position of the tool in Cartesian coordi- 
nates. The desired position of the robot would be compared with the actual position of the 
robot as measured by the tracking system. The difference is equal to the path error and 
would be used to drive the compensator, thus ideally eliminating the positioning error. 
However, real time tracking systems with the necessary resolution are expensive, limiting 
the number of realistic applications. This method also requires communication between 
the robot controller, the tracking system and the external servo controller. Robot spe- 
cific communication software must be developed, limiting the universal portability of the 
system. However, once the communication software is completed, the system can operate 
autonomously, no robot specific models, complicated algorithms or templates are required. 

Thus two methods of improving the absolute positioning capabilities are available 
without using templates. For applications where cost is not critical, the pseudo closed form 
solution using the realtime tracking system may provide the best results. In applications 
where cost constraints are imposed, modeling the error sources and compensating for 
the errors using various techniques is the only alternative to using templates. Several 
compensation techniques were developed and demonstrated with positive results. 

With either method, the external positioning servo provides fast, high resolution po- 
sitioning or force control at the end effector. The external compensator can be attached 
to any industrial robot. It could be scaled up for larger robots, or scaled down for smaller 
robot applications. Additional degrees-of-freedom could be added for applications requir- 
ing high resolution control in more than one degree-of-freedom. In fact a five degree-of- 
freedom external compensator has been proposed and preliminary designs developed for 
an Automated Umbilical Connection Device for use at the Kennedy Space Center. 

APPENDIX A 
CAUSES FOR INACCURACIES IN INDUSTRIAL ROBOTS 

In this appendix, several general categories which contribute to positioning errors are 
listed and described. Much of this information has been discovered through experimenta- 
tion, but a concise review of robot errors was developed by C. Day in the article "Robot 
Accuracy Issues and Methods of Improvement" [4] and is used as outline for this appendix. 

Environmental Factors 

Environmental factors like temperature and humidity are sometimes overlooked or can- 
not be changed in commercial applications. However, these factors can have a significant 
impact on the accuracy and performance of an industrial robot. For example, a steel screw 
(re-circulating ball type) with a length of 39.4 inch (1000 mm) may change its temperature 
10° Fahrenheit (4.5" Centigrade) which is representative of the temperature changes in a 
plant, the length of the screw will change by 0.003 inch (0.08 mm). For the elbow joint of 
the T3-776, the distance of the end effector is approximately 10 times that of the moment 
arm of the ball screw, thus a change of W°F (4.5°C) in the ball screw could produce an 
error of 0.030 inch (0.80 mm) at the end effector. 

Changes in temperature also affect dimensions of rotating components of drive mech- 
anisms. These in turn produce changes in stiction, Coulomb friction, and viscous friction 
values. Such friction related factors affect the characteristics and accuracy of robots and 
they introduce additional un-modeled perturbations to the robot controller [4]. These 
changes due to temperature could be modeled in the controller and be reduced or elimi- 
nated. 

198 

199 

Kinematic Factors 

As mentioned previously, Kinematic factors include improper link lengths and im- 
proper joint It is intuitive that improper link lengths will lead to poor positional accuracy 
in robots. From the Environmental Factors section, it is evident that changes in tem- 
perature effect link lengths and therefore reduce positional accuracy. Manufacturing and 
assembly errors can also cause improper link lengths which again leads to reduced posi- 
tional accuracy. A link length can be different from its nominal value due to machining 
tolerances and tolerance stack-ups from a number of sub-assemblies could produce addi- 
tional errors. 

Improper angularity between a pair of adjacent axes also contributes to positional 
inaccuracies at the end effector [9]. These errors can be attributed to machining errors or 
assembly errors of joint components (such as in the incorrect seating of bearings). 

Other kinematic factors include drivetrain errors including: non-uniformity of gears, 
chains, belts, ball screws and etc. Obviously, they can cause positional errors of the robot. 
By careful measurements of the links and drive train components in the assembled robot, 
many of these kinematic factors could be modeled and included in the robot controller 
[33]. 

Dynamic Factors 

Present robots are typically more flexible than machine tools. This introduces prob- 
lems that were normally ignored in the machine tool industry because they were of little 
consequence. These problems include: very low structural frequencies, inertial effects of 
other joints and deflections at the end effector due to gravity and external applied forces. 
Thus, when using the robot to provide an accurate path trajectory at the tool, the dynamic 
effects should be taken into account by the robot controller. 

Flexibility in the robot structure can be introduced by several causes. They will be 

divided into three groups: 

1. Flexibihties due to structural members or link structures. 

200 

2. Flexibilities due to bearings at the joints. 

3. Flexibilities due drive mechanisms. 

Typically, structural members are designed to support a static load of approximately 
10 times that of their rated capacity, thus providing sufficient rigidity. Little improvement 
is needed in the form of link structure rigidity. However, by increasing the rigidity to 10 
times the required static load, the mass of the link is greatly increased, thus reducing the 
load capacity at the end effector. Some robot manufacturers are presently pursuing the 
introduction of composite structures for structural members, thus reducing the mass of 
the link and simultaneously, increase its stiffness. 

Bearings at the joint are implemented in a similar manner, they are usually designed 
to carry several times the required loads for a given lile and provide minimum deflections 
under moment loading. 

From a detailed dynamic analysis of a standard T3-776 robot, the flexibilities in the 
joint drive mechanisms produced the majority of the structural flexibilities encountered 
in the robot structure [8]. Torque tubes, belts, reduction gear sets and other drive train 
components contribute to the flexibilities in the drive train. By the proper placement 
of the encoders/resolvers, the effects of these flexibilities can be eliminated over time by 
including them in the positional control loop [15]. 

For example, if an encoder were mounted at the joint, the flexibilities between the 
servomotor and the joint would be included in the positional feedback loop and will be 
eliminated over time. For very flexible drive trains, this type of arrangement can lead to 
instabilities and therefore advanced control strategies must be developed and implemented 
in these cases. However, those flexibilities which are not included in the positional feedback 
loop need to be eliminated by other means. By modeling the flexibilities of the robot 
structure accurately and measuring external forces at the end effector in real time, the 
effect of these external flexibilities may be eliminated over time. This method of flexibility 
compensation was demonstrated in Chapter 5. 

Inertial parameters play a role in the trajectory accuracy and the desired velocity of 

201 

robots. It can be shown that by varying the position of down stream links, the inertial 
load reflected back to the base axis of the T3-776, for example, can vary by ten times or 
more. This could effect the velocity response of the base axis, making the velocity response 
of the base axis essentially dependant on the position of the end effector. Thus dynamic 
compensation should be implemented on robots which are affected by the varying inertial 
loads. Several dynamic compensation methods were discussed in Chapter 2. 

In addition to inertial effects, friction plays a vital role in the performance of the robot. 
Friction parameters of robots are difficult to quantify accurately. In a typical axis drive 
train (not a direct drive system) only 50 percent to 90 percent of the servomotor out put 
power is delivered to the joint. The rest of the power is lost as heat in the drive train. 
In most cases, it is extremely difficult to accurately quantify friction, and include fric- 
tion compensation in the robot controller. Obviously, proper lubrication reduces friction, 
improves efficiency and increases the life of drive components. All friction parameters 
dissipate energy and contribute to robot inaccuracy [4]. 

Measurement Factors 

Resolvers and encoders provide the most common type of positional feedback on indus- 
trial robots. As mentioned previously, the placement of resolvers or encoders can reduce 
the effects of flexibilities in drive train components. If the encoder were placed at the 
joint (to allow the inclusion of the drive train flexibilities) the resolution of that encoder 
would have to be great to detect small motions at the joint. Resolutions of up to several 
thousand counts per revolution are necessary. Conversely, if the encoder were mounted 
at the servomotor, the effective resolution of the encoder would be multiplied by the gear 
ratio of the drive train, and the encoder could have a coarser resolution. In this configura- 
tion (the encoder at the servomotor), compliance of the drive train components can affect 
the performance and accuracy of the robot, especially with heavy loads or large external 
forces. 

In some instances, force sensors such as strain gauges located on flexible links or 

202 

wrist mounted dynamometers are used to detect external forces and provide feedback to 
compensation mechanisms which will reduce positional errors due to applied forces. Most 
commercial dynamometers incorporate a six degree-of-freedom bridge, instrumented with 
strain gauges. Strain gauges introduce measurement errors due to the analog type output, 
temperature changes or mounting techniques. These measurement errors can be reduced 
through periodic calibration and maintenance procedures. 

External measurement schemes are sometimes employed to reduce the positional error 
of a robot or to provide a method to calibrate the position of the robot. The advantage of 
using an external measurement system would be that a majority of the causes of positional 
error could be included in the positional feedback loop of the robot controller. There would 
be little need in accurately modeling and analyzing a robot to determine possible sources 
of positional error. They provide reliable measurements of robot accuracy independent of 
robot parameters. 

Among the various instruments used in external positional measurement systems are: 
laser interferometer, theodolite, opto-camera systems and pose measuring devices. These 
external devices, such as a laser interferometer, provide high resolution positioning accu- 
racy, up to 0.02 mm in one direction for a moving target. Some of these measurement 
techniques are for static or pose measurements only, for example: theodolite, eddy current 
probes, capacitance probes and position sensitive detectors with coUimated light beams. 
Laser tracking provides real time measurement of the position (and in some cases the 
orientation) of the robot end effector, but with reduced accuracy (0.1 mm) and high costs. 

Computational Factors 

When robots are programmed in the typical point to point manner, the desired tool 
position (or end effector position) is recorded for the various points. Trajectories are later 
developed to allow a coordinated motion through the taught points. This trajectory com- 
putation takes time, from several milliseconds to several hundred milliseconds depending 
on the robot. These tool point trajectories are then broken down to actual desired joint 

203 

positions. In most controllers a 16 bit word is used represent the calculated numbers and 
in some cases the accumulation of round off errors will produce significant inaccuracies at 
the end effector. It is evident that by increasing the number of bits to 32 for example, will 
help to reduce the errors due to round off. In fact some robot manufacturers are offering 
32 bit micro-processors on their machines. 

In addition to round off errors, most robot manufacturers use an inverse kinematic 
solution to calculate desired joint positions. In this solution, most manufacturers assume 
that the actual link lengths are equal to the lengths specified in the original design. As 
mentioned earlier, there are errors in manufacturing that may cause the inverse kinematic 
solution to be rather inaccurate. 

Another type of error which can be found in the robot controller is the error produced 
due to analog signal interpolation. Analog signals in the positional loop include the out 
put of resolvers, potentiometers and tachometers. Similar to errors in A/D converters are 
the errors from D/A converters. 

Application Errors 

The previously mentioned factors (Environmental, Kinematic, Dynamic, Measurement 
and Computational) affect both the absolute and joint accuracy as defined earlier. While 
joint and absolute positional accuracies are important, ultimately the relative accuracy 
at the work piece is the highest priority. The relative accuracy at the work piece can be 
compromised by the following problems: improper installation of the robot, inaccurate 
location of the work piece and inaccurate location of end-of-arm tooling. 

Some of the inaccuracies at the end-of-arm tooling can be traced to the flexible mount- 
ing of the robot base. It is critical for most industrial applications that robots be properly 
secured with anchors as per manufacturers instructions. This will provide a more accurate 
robot world coordinate system, which all other robot coordinate systems are based. 

Additionally, the work piece reference frame must be accurately known and fixed, in 
relation to the robot's world coordinate system. If the location of the work piece is not 

204 

known exactly (in the robot's world coordinate reference frame), the relative accuracy 
of the robot at the work piece will be reduced. These in-accuracies will be especially 
noticeable for robot path programs produced off-line. 

There are several causes of poorly known work piece reference frames including: flexible 
work piece fixturing, improperly measured fixture location in robot world coordinates and 
improperly mounted work pieces. 

Precise knowledge of the location of end-of-arm tooling is required for accurate ma- 
chining. If the tool coordinates were measured in-accurately or a flexible tool holder is 
used, the exact location of the tool will not be known. This would lead to offsets in the 
location of drilled holes, for example. 

1 Flexibihties due to structural members or link structures. 

2 Flexibihties due to bearings at the joints. 

3 Flexibilities due drive mechanisms. 

APPENDIX B 
EQUIPMENT DESCRIPTION 

Cincinnati Milacron T3-776 Robot 

The robot used in this research was a Cincinnati Milacron T3-776 industrial robot. 
This robot uses high torque, DC servomotors to drive the six axis serial manipulator. The 
base axis of the robot is driven by a set of crown and pinion gears, wlrich are preloaded 
to reduce backlash. The shoulder and elbow joints use recirculating ball screw drives in 
a simple four bar arrangement. The wrist is a compact three roll revolute device, with 
the actuators located at the elbow. Co-axial torque tubes are used to transfer the torque 
from the actuators to the individual joints of the wrist as illustrated in Figure B.l. 

The robot has a stated load carrying capacity of 150 pounds, with the manipulator fully 
extended. The repeatabihty of the device is stated as +/- 0.015 inches. A teach pendant 
is used to program the robot, but a recent option allows the robot to be controhed on line 
in real time using either global or joint coordinates. This feature would allow the path 
of the robot to commanded directly from a CADAM type system or if some corrective 
motions were needed they could be directly commanded to the robot controller by a host 
computer. 

Figure B.2 illustrates the control architecture of the T3-776. An Intel 16 bit bus is 
used to provide communication between the various components in the controller. An 
8086 based microprocessor is used to supervise the controller, and in this module, the 
desired commands of the path program are carried out. A second 8086 microprocessor is 
used to transform the path in tool coordinates to the required joint coordinates. The joint 
coordinates are updated at 15 msec intervals. Also connected to the bus are extended 
dynamic memory card, serial I/O cards and the servo I/O boards which actually produce 
the motion command for the servos. Each servo I/O board controls two motor controllers. 
Each motor controller in turn produces the current used to drive each actuator. A feed 

205 

206 

Roll 1 

^\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\ 

e: 

)////////////////?_ 

Drive 3 

Vt:^^ 

ve 2 

(\\\\\\\^ DrivelAWW 

Roll 2 

Roll 3 

Figure B.l: Cincinnati Milacron T3-776 Wrist Assembly 

back resolver sends back position information to the servo I/O and the difference is used 
to drive the motor controllers. 

Dynamic Analyzer 

For the dynamic modeling of the robot structure and the system modelling of the robot 
controller and electronic circuits, a GenRad 2515-9175 Dynamic Analyzer was used. The 
GenRad provided four measurement channels at the front of the chassis, and an expansion 
block providing an additional 12 channels was later added to the machine. The GenRad 
provided real time data acquisition and storage of up to 512 K bytes of information at 
up to 4096 Hz. This information could then be reviewed in a number of different formats 
including time and frequency displays. Additionally, transfer functions may be obtained 
from any pairs of channels selected, and multiple transfer functions could be produced as 
required. 

Additional features of the machine include curve fitting of transfer functions, and the 
automatic generation of animated mode shapes of structures. The GenRad also provides a 
signal generator with various outputs including random noise over fixed frequency ranges. 

207 

Supervisor 

16 B 
Bus 

t 

8086 

Axis 
1 

1 1 

1 

Servo 
I/O 

Axis 
2 

■ 1 

T 

ransformatlon | | 

1 

808S 

1 

Axis 
3 

, 

1 1 

1 

1 

Servo 
I/O 

T 

Axis 
4 

' 1 

Dynamic 
Memory 

Axis 
5 

1 1 

I 

S^rvo 
1/0 

Pendant 

Axis 
6 

" ' 1 

Serial 
1/0 

Terminal 

VAX 

1 

1 

Tspe 

Serial 
'. I/O 

- 

1 

■ PC 

1_ 

Figure B.2: Control Architecture Of The T3-776 Robot 

208 

The random noise generator was used to provide signals to produce the transfer functions 
of the various circuits described earlier. 

The instrumented hammer and acclerometer used in the experiments were manufac- 
tured by PCB instruments. The hammer and impact transducer was PCB model 086B20 
Short Sledge Hammer, with a of sensitivity 1.04 mv/lb (0.23 mv/N), range - 5000 lb (0 
- 22300 N). PCB model 084A60 Impact Super Soft Tip and an additional mass of 0.35 
slug (5.11 Kg) were used with the hammer. The accelerometer used was PCB model 393C 
Seismic Accelerometer, with a sensitivity of 1.007 V/g. A PCB charge amplifier model 
480 DC6 Power supply was used to condition the output of the acclerometer. 

APPENDIX C 
SIMULATION PROGRAMS 

INITIAL 

CINTERVAL CINT=.001 

MAXTERVAL MAXT= .001 

NSTEPS=1 

CONSTANT DT=.0005,TSTP=1.0 

CONSTANT S1=1,S2=.01,S3=0,S4=0,S5=10,S6=1,S7=0 

CONSTANT KP=10 , HV=0 . 08 , KV=1 , TL=0 , VC=0 

CONSTANT KE=.155,R=.75,KT=.155 

CONSTANT JM=.0002,GR=1,C=10 

CONSTANT K=50 0,M=1 

"THIS PROGRAM SIMULATES A GENERAL DC SERVO AND CONTROLLER" 

"SI - INPUT COMMAND II, S2 - VEL. FB GAIN, VC - COMP VOLT" 

"S3 - COMP GAIN, S4 - LOAD TQ SWITCH, TL - EXT. LOAD TQ" 

"S5 - LIMITS OF CURRENT AMPLIFIER" 

"S6=l, S7=0 - EXTERNAL FLEX; S6=0, S7=l - INTERNAL FLEX" 

"KP - POSITIONAL GAIN, HV - TACH GAIN, KV - VEL LOOP GAIN" 

"KE - EMF VOLT FB CONS, R - RESISTANCE, KT - TORQUE CONS" 

"JM - MOTOR INERTIA, GR -GEAR REDUCTION RATIO, C - DAMPER" 

"K - EXTERNAL SPRING CONSTANT, M - EXTERNAL LOAD CONSTANT" 
END 
DYNAMIC 

T = T+DT 

II = S1*STEP(0.05) 
"II - STEP INPUT" 

PV = (I1-(X*S6+Y*S7) ) *KP 
"PV - VOLTAGE FROM POSITIONAL LOOP" 

VM = (PV+VC*S3-HV*S2*XD) *KV 

V = VM-KE*XD 

I = V/R 

I = BOUND(-S5,S5,I) 
"I - CURRENT TO MOTOR" 

TT = KT*I 

TM = TT-(TL*S4) 
"TM - TORQUE REQUIRED TO ACCELERATE MOTOR" 

XDD = TM/JM 

XD = XD+XDD*DT 

X = X+XD*DT 
"X - POSITION OF MOTOR" 

XR = X/GR 

XRD = XD/GR 

YDD = (XRD*C-YD*C+XR*K-Y*K)/M 
YD = YD+YDD*DT ,. 

Y = Y+YD*DT 
"Y - THE OUTPUT OF AN ATTACHED SPRING/MASS/DASHPOT SYSTEM" 

END 

TERMT(T.GE.TSTP) 
TERMINAL 
END 

209 

INITIAL ^^^„ 

"PROGRAM NAME IS SIEMENS. CSL" 

CINTERVAL CINT=.0001 

MAXTERVAL MAXT= .0001 

follllm DT=. 00001, TSTP=. 25, K=30.0,WN=10000 
rONSTANT R=0. 64, L=0. 00353, JM=0. 002, KT=1.0,KE-0 
SSI?^? ?I=3. 14159, K=30,T=0,VM=0,VX=0,VB=0ID=0, 1=0 
CONSTANT TT=0,TM=0,TL=0,WD=0,WM=0,TV=0,VDO=0 
CONSTANT VP=0 , VKDD=0 , VKD=0 , VK=0 , VD=0 , SO=0 , SN=0 

CONSTANT VQD=0,VQ=0,SO=0,SD-0 

CONSTANT Sl= . 25 , S2=- . 045 , S3= . 15 , S4=-20 , S5-50 , S6-1 , S7-1 

"?SlS^ROG^ E^LATES THE SIEMENS CONTROLLER OF THE T3" 

END 
DYNAMIC 

T=T+DT 

VC=S1*STEP(.1+S2) 

VP=VC-TV*S3 

VDO=VD 
VKDD=K*VP*WN*WN-2*WN*VKD-WN*WN*VK 

VKD=VKD+VKDD*DT 

VK=VK+VKD*DT 

VD=BOUND(-12.0,12.0,VK) 

VQD=VD*S4 

VQ=VQ+VQD*DT 

SO=SIGN(1.0,VDO) 

SN=SIGN(1.0,VD) 

IF(SO.NE.SN)VQ=0 

VM=-S5*VQ 
VB=(VM*S6+S7)*C0S(180*2*PI*T) 

VX=VM+VB 

I=VX/R 

TT=KT*I 

TM=TT-TL 

WD=TM/JM 

WM=WM+WD*DT 

TV=WM*0. 1814 

END 

TERMT(T.GE.TSTP) 

TERMINAL 
END 

T=0 

VC=0 

VP=0 

VDO=0 

VKDD=0 

VKD=0 

VK=0 

VD=0 

VQD=0 

VQ=0 

SO=0 

SN=0 

S0=0 

SN=0 

VM=0 

VB=0 

VX=0 

ID=0 

I =0 

210 

APPENDIX E 
PC CONTROL SOFTWARE 

type trys'-dan . pas 
■C$1 FCLDEFS.TP3- 
<:$! PCLERRS.PAS3- 
VAR 

LB, MB,: byte; 

WRDiARRhYCI - .7: OF IMTEGizH'- 

FLAG , WRD 1 , R_RDY , EASE_PQRT , ADVALUE , STATUS , Y : I N I ESLR ? 
ACCL:REAL; 
PROCEDURE RED7U0RD ; 
BEGIN 

FL.AG: = l; 

FORTuEA3E_PGRT:1:=FORT:EASE_PORT3 or li; f. SENDS THE HANDSHAKE 
PaRTCEASE_FORT]:=FaRTCBASE_PGRT] AfJD 239; i PULSE TO CRSO ]■ 
REPEAT 
REPEAT 

R_RDY:^RCRTEBASE_pnRTj AND ii^V 
UMTIL <R_RDY=£''+; :, 

LB:=paRTi:BHSE_PQPT-i-^:-: ? -C READS LCW BYTE OF IvORD > 
H£:--=PORTEEASE_FORT^-oj ; i READS HX BYTE OF WOF;D :■ 
WRDHFLAG: :=LB^E56^HB; -C ASSEMBLES THE DATA UORD ]■ 
FLAG:=FLA3+1 ; 
UNTIL (FLAG=a) H 
END- 

•C MAIN I 
BEGIN 

BAGE_PORT : -396 ; 
REPEAT 
■: RED7N0RD ; > 
CLRSCRj 

STATUS:=/nITIALIZE5 
STATUS : =SELEETSOARO (1 ) ? 
STATUS : =ADCVALUE '. , 1 , ADVALUE ) ; 
STATUS ; =T£RM I NATE 5 
ACCL:=INT( 100*( ( ADVALUE-SC^7 ) /SOh . 3) )/100; 

FLAG : ^-a - 
REPEAT 

GOTOXY (.35 , E+FLAG ) • 
-TEXTCOLOR ( l"+FLAG ) ; 
WR I TELN ( WRD C FLAG : ) ; 
FLAG -. =FLAG+ 1 ; 
UNTIL (FLAG=5) ; 

GOTOXY (35,11) ; TEXTCOLOR ( 7 ) ; 
WRITE(ACCL); 
REPEAT Y : =Y+ 1 ; UNT I L ( Y=200 ) ; Y : =0 ; 
UNTIL (KEYPRESSED) 5 
END . 

211 

Bibliography 

[1] J. E. Engelberger, "Historical Perspec- 

tive of Industrial Robots," Hand Book of Industrial Robotics . John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, 1985, pp. 3-8. 

[2] C. F. Carter, "The Role Of Robots In Automating Work," 
Hand Book of Industrial Robotics . John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1985, pp. 9-20. 

[3] "Draft: American Standard For Industrial Robots Performance Evaluation," Robotic 
Industries Association, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1988. 

[4] C. P. Day, "Robot Accuracy Issues and Methods of Improvement," Robots 11 Con- 
ference Proceedings, Society of Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1987, 
pp. 5.1-5.24. 

[5] "Use Of T3 Cincinnati Milacron Robot For Routing Jobs," McDonnell Douglas 
Robotic Ad-Hoc Study, St. Louis, Missouri, 1986, pp. 35-36. 

[6] "Template Free Drilling And Routing," McDonnell Douglas Robotic Ad-Hoc Study, 
St. Louis, Missouri, 1986, pp. 44-45. 

[7] J. Kartak, "Templateless Robotic Drilling of Complex Aerospace Assemblies," Robots 
11 Conference Proceedings, Society of Manufacturing Enginners, Dearborn, Michigan, 
1987, pp. 11.1-11.9. 

[8] E. L. Stern, "Modeling of a Robot Structure For Compensation of Deflections in 
Light Machining," Unpublished Master's Thesis, University of Florida, Gainesville, 
Florida, 1985. 

[9] M. S. Sklar, "Metrology and Calibration Techniques for the Performance Enhance- 
ment of Industrial Robots," Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Texas, Austin, Texas, 
1988. 

[10] H. VanBrussel, L. Vastmans, "A Compensation Method for the Dynamic Control of 
Robots," Journal of Manufacturing Systems, Volume 4, No. 1, 1984, pp. 85-96. 

[11] C. G. Atkeson, C. H. An, J. M. Hollerbach, "Estimation of Inertial Load Parameters 
of Manipulator Loads and Links," The International Journal of Robotics Research, 
Vol. 5, No. 3, Fall 1986, pp. 101-119. 

[12] B. Armstrong, 0. Khatib, J. Burdick, "The Explicit Dynamic Model And Inertial 
Parameters of the PUMA 500 Arm," Proceedings of IEEE Robotics and Automation 
Conference, St. Louis, Missouri, 1986. 

[13] DC Motors Speed Controls Servo Systems, Electro-Craft Corporation, Hopkins, Min- 
nesota, 1975. 

[14] Technical Reference Manual For Siemens Motor Controllers , Cincinnati Milacron 
Corporation, Cincinnati, Ohio, 1986. 

[15] J. Tlusty, E. Stern, "Use of a Structural Model in Compensating for Robot Deflec- 
tions," Annals of the CIRP, Vol. 34/1/1985, 1985, pp. 357-363. 

212 

213 

[16] M. H. Raibert, "Analytical Equations Vs. Table Look-Up For Manipulation: A Uni- 
fying Concept," IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, New Orleans, Lousiana, 
1978, pp. 107-112. 

[17] J. Y. S. Lull, W. M. Walker, R. P. Paul, "On-Line Computational Scheme For Me- 
chanical Manipulators," ASMS Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement and Con- 
trol, Vol. 102, Spring, 1980, pp. 69-76. 

[18] H. Asada, J. E. Slotine, Robot Analysis and Control , John Wiley and Sons, New 
York, 1986. 

[19] A. K. Bejczy, "Robot Arm Dynamics and Control," Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Cali- 
fornia Institute of Technology, TM 33-69, 1974. 

[20] R. P. Paul, Robot Manipulators: Mathematics, Programming and Control, M.I.T. 
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1981. 

[21] R. P. Paul, "Modelling, Trajectory Calculation and Serving of a Computer Controlled 
Arm," Stanford University, Artificial Intellegence Labratory, Stanford, California, 
1972. 

[22] C. H. Wu, R. P. Paul, "Manipulator Compliance Based on Joint Torque Control," 
Proceedings of 19th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, Vol.1, Albuquerque, 
New Mexico, 1980. 

[23] J. Maples, "End Point Force Control of a Flexible Manipulator Arm," Ph.D. Disserta- 
tion, Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California, 
1985. 

[24] D. E. Whitney, J. L. Nevins, "What Is The Remote Center Compliance (RCC) and 
What Can It Do," C. S. Draper Laboratory, 1981. 

[25] J. W. Hill, Force Controlled Assembler, Industrial Robots Vol. 2-Applications, 
Clarendon Press, Oxford, Great Britan, 1983, pp. 474-478. 

[26] S. W. Tilley, R. H. Cannon, R. Kraft, "End Point Force Control of a Very Flexible 
Manipulator With a Fast End- Effector," Proceedings ASME Winter Annual Meeting, 
DSC-Vol. 3, Anaheim, California, 1986, pp. 1-10. 

[27] R. L. HoUis, "A Planar XY Robotic Fine Positioning Device," IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation, St. Louis Missouri, 1985, pp. 329-336. 

[28] R. L. Hollis, "A Fine Positioning Device For Enhancing Robot Precision," Robots 9 
Conference Proceedings, Detroit, Michigan, 1985, pp 6.28-36. 

[29] R. Benton, D. Waters, "Intellegent Task Automation-Interim Technical Report No. 
5 of 7," Contract No. F33615-82-C-5092, Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio, 1984. 

[30] H. VanBrussel, H. Thielemans, J. Simons, "Further Developments of the Active Com- 
pliant Wrist (AACW) for Robot Assembly," Proceedings of 11th International Sym- 
posium of Industrial Robots, Tokyo, Japan, 1981, pp. 377-384. 

[31] J. Hudgens, "Modelling and Analysis of a Fully- Parallel Six Degree-Of-Freedom Mi- 
cromanipulator," Unpublished Master's Thesis, University of Texas, Austin, Texas, 
1986. 

[32] J. Tlusty, D. Wegerif, "Compensating For Deflections of a Robot in Light Machining 
Applications," Proceedings ASME Winter Annual Meeting, DSC-Vol. 3, Anaheim, 
California, 1986, pp. 91-100. 

214 

[33] D. E. Whitney, "Historical Perspective and State of the Art in Robot Force Control," 
IEEE International Conference of Robotocs and Automation, St. Louis, Missouri, 
1985, pp. 262-268. 

[34] J. Craig, M. H. Raibert, "A Systematic Method For Hybrid Position Force Con- 
trol of a Manipulator," Proceedings of 1979 IEEE Computer Software Applications 
Conference, Chicago, Illinois, 1979, pp. 126-133. 

[35] M. T. Mason, "Compliance and Force control for Computer Controlled Manipula- 
tors," IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics^ Vol. SMC-11, 1981, pp. 
418-432. 

[36] 0. Khatib, "A Unified Approach for Motion and Force Control of Robot Manipula- 
tors: The Operational Space Formulation," IEEE Joural of Robotics and Automation, 
Vol. RA-3, No. 1, 1987, pp. 43-53. 

[37] H. Raibert, J. Craig, "Hybrid Position/Force Control of Manipulators," ASME Trans- 
actions On Dynamic Systems, Measurement and Control, Vol. 102, 1981, pp. 1137- 
1148. 

[38] T. Stepien, L. Sweet, M. Good, M. Tomizuka, "Control of Tool/Workpiece Contact 
Force with Application to Robotic Deburring," IEEE Journal of Robotics and Au- 
tomation, Vol. RA-3, No. 1, 1987, pp. 7-17. 

[39] K. Heafner, P. Houpt, T. Baker, M. Dausch, "Real Time Position/Force Control 
for Deburring," Proceedings ASME Winter Annual Meeting, DSC- Vol. 3, Anaheim, 
California, 1986, pp. 73-78. 

[40] F. Paul, P. Fitzpatrick, "Robotic Controlled Brush Finishing," Proceedings ASME 
Winter Annual Meeting, DSC- Vol. 3, Anaheim, California, 1986, pp. 101-108. 

[41] D. Whitney, M. Brown, "Metal Removal Models and Process Planning for Grinding", 
Robots 11 Conference Proceedings, Society of Manufacturing Enginners, Dearborn, 
Michigan, 1987, pp. 19.29-44. 

[42] H. Hirabayashi, S. Ohwada, I. Yoshida, A. Miki, "Force Controlled Deburring 
Robots," Robots 11 Conference Proceedings, Society of Manufacturing Enginners, 
Dearborn, Michigan, 1987, pp. 19.1-12. 

[43] H. Kazerooni, T. Sheridan, P. Houpt, "Robust Compliant Motion for Manipulators, 
Part I: The Fundemental Concepts of Compliant Motion," IEEE Jouirnal of Robotics 
and Automation, Vol. RA-2, 1986, pp. 83-92. 

[44] H. Kazerooni, T. Sheridan, P. Houpt, "Robust Compliant Motion for Manipulators, 
Part H: Design Method," IEEE Jouirnal of Robotics and Automation, Vol. RA-2, 
1986, pp. 93-105. 

[45] End of Arm Tooling Brochure , Barry Wright Corporation, Watertown, Mas- 
sachusetts, 1987. 

[46] D. Seltzer, "Compliant Robot Wrist Sensing for Precision Assembly," Proceedings 
ASME Winter Annual Meeting, DCS- Vol. 3, Anaheim, California, 1986, pp. 161-168. 

[47] R. C. Winfrey, "Elastic Link Mechanism," Dynamics, Transaction of ASME, Journal 
of Engineering for Industry, Vol. 93, 1971, pp. 142-150. 

[48] A. G. Erdman, "A General Method for Kineto-Elastodynamic Analysis and Synthesis 
of Mechanisms," Ph. D. Dissertation, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New 
York, 1971. 

215 

[49] S. Dubowsky, T. Gardner, "Design and Analysis of Multilink Flexible Mechanisms 
With Multiple Clearance Connections," ASME Journal of Engineering for Industry, 
Vol. 99, 1977, pp. 35-43. 

[50] W. Book, "Vibration Considerations in Manipulator Design", Study of Design and 
Control of Remote Manipulators, Contract Report, NASA contract NASA-28055, 
1973. 

[51] R. Huston, F. Kelly, "Modelling of Flexibility Effects in Robot Arms," Proceedings of 
the Joint Automated Control Conference, Charlottesville, VA, June 1981, pp. 260-266. 

[52] S. Dubowsky, W. Sunada, "On the Dynamic Analysis and Behavior of Industrial 
Robot Manipulators With Elastic Members," ASME Journal of Mechanical Design, 
Vol. 105, 1983. 

[53] B. Thompson, C. Sung, "A Variational Formulation for the Non-Linear Finite Ele- 
ment Analysis of Flexible Linkages," ASME Paper No. 84-DET-15, Presented at the 
Design Engineering Technical Conference, Cambridge Massachusetts, 1984. 

[54] C. Bagci, "Computer- Aided Continuous Correction of End- Effector Position and Ori- 
entation Errors in Industrial Robots Due to Elastic Deformations," Proceedings of 
ASME Mechanisms Conference, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1984. 

[55] A. Zalucky, D. Hardt, "Active Control of Robot Structure Deflections," ASME Jour- 
nal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement and Control, Vol. 106, 1984. 

[56] W. Snyder, Industrial Robots: Computer Interfacing and Control , Prentice-Hall, En- 
glewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1985. 

[57] R. P. Paul, "Modelling, Trajectory Calculation and Serving of a Computer Controlled 
Arm," Internal Publication, Stanford University, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 
1972. 

[58] R. P. Paul, "Manipulator Cartesian Path Control," IEEE International Conference 
of Cybernetics and Society, Vol.9, No. 11, New York, 1975, pp. 702-711. 

[59] R. H. Taylor, "Planning and Execution of Straight Line Motion Trajectory," IBM 
Thomas J. Watson Research Center Research Report RC6657, New York, 1977. 

[60] "Laser Based Coordinate Measurement System," CMS- 1000, Chesapeake Laser Sys- 
tems, Inc., Annapolis, Maryland, 1987. 

[61] M. Oleson, "Integration and Double Integration, A Practical Technique," Shock and 
Vibration Bulletin, No. 35, 1966, pp. 1-10. 

[62] M. Oleson, "Components of a New Shock Measurement System," Report of NRL 
Progress, No. PB176290, 1967, pp. 16-27. 

[63] K. Ogata, Modern Control Enginnering, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New 
Jersy, 1970^ 

[64] G. Daklquist, A. Bjorck, Numerical Methods , Prentice- Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New 
Jersey, 1974. 

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 

Dan Wegerif is currently empoyed by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics 
Company at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. He is happily married to the 
former Denise Westerfield and has two children, Megan and Gerritt; they are 
expecting a third in February, 1989. He enjoys weight lifting and all forms of 
water sports. 

216 

I certify that I have read this study and that in my opinion it conforms to 
acceptable standards of scholarly prcsentatiofi and is fully adequate, in scope and 
quality, as a dissertation for the degree of Doctor of PTiilosophy. 

i 

y'}Cs/l 

V'VAA/' 

I. 

Dr. Jir-a Tlusty 

Graduate Research' Professor of 

Mechanical Engineering 

I certify that I have read this study and that in my opinion it conforms to 
acceptable standards of scholarly presentation and is fully adequate, in scope and 
quality, as a dissertation for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy., - --; 

Y,^^^ 

Dr. Gary.fc. Matthew 
Associate Professor of 
Mechanical Engineering 

I certify that I have read this study and that in my opinion it conforms to 
acceptable standards of scholarly presentation and is fully adequate, in scope and 
quality, as a dissertation for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. 

.7 

Dr. John Schuellcr 
Assistant Professor of 
Mechanical Engineering 

I certify that I have read this study and that in my opinion it conforms to 
acceptable standards of scholarly presentation and is fully adequate, in scope and 
quality, as a dissertation for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. 

Dr. Tom Bullock 
Professor of Electrical 
Engineering 

I certify that I have read this study and that in my o 
acceptable standards of scholarly presentation an 
quality, as a dissertation for the degree of Doctor 

it conforms to 
n scope and 

Assistant Professor of 
Agricultural Engineering 

This dissertation was submitted to the Graduate Faculty of the College of 
Engineering and to the Graduate School and was accepted as partial fulfillment of 
the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. 

August, 1988 lUdUSt' Q - i&jUH^ 

Dean, College of Engineering 

Dean, Graduate School
Skip to main content

    ABOUT
    CONTACT
    BLOG
    PROJECTS
    HELP
    DONATE
    TERMS
    JOBS
    VOLUNTEER
    PEOPLE

    web
    texts
    movies
    audio
    software
    image
    logo
    search
    Search the Archive

    upload
    personSIGN IN

Full text of "A computer simulation study of an expert system for walking machine motion planning"
See other formats

' 

MOHTLn-Y, CiAi 

ii SCHOOL 
IA 05943-6002 

NPS-52-87-049 

NAVAL 

POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 

Monterey, California 

A COMPUTER SIMULATION STUDY OF 
AN EXPERT SYSTEM FOR 
WALKING MACHINE MOTION PLANNING 

by 

Richard Paul Goodpasture 

December 1987 

Thesis Advisor: Robert B. McGhee 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 

Prepared for: 

Ohio State University 
Research Foundation 
1314 Kinnear Road 
Columbus, OH 43212 

T 234246 

DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY 

NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 
MONTEREY. CA 93943 StOO 

Rear Admiral R. C. Austin Kneale T. Marshall 

Superintendent Acting Provost 

This thesis prepared in conjunction with research sponsored 
in part by Ohio State Univ. Research Foundation under RF 
Project No. 716520. 

Reproduction of all or part of this report is authorized. 

Released By: 

:URITY CLASSIFICATION OF THIS PAGE 

REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

«Mm , M LASSIFICATION 

lb RESTRICTIVE MARKINGS 

SECURITY CLASSIFICATION AUTHORITY 

3 DISTRIBUTION /AVAILABILITY OF REPORT 

Approved for public release, 
distribution is unlimited 

DECLASSIFICATION / DOWNGRADING SCHEDULE 

PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUMBER(S) 

NPS-52-87-049 

5 MONITORING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUMBER(S) 

NAME OF PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

val Postgraduate School 

6b OFFICE SYMBOL 
(If applicable) 

52 

7a NAME OF MONITORING ORGANIZATION 

Prof. Kenneth Waldron, Dept of Mech 
Eng'g, Ohio State University 

ADDRESS {City, State , and ZIP Code) 

nterey, California 93943-5000 

7b ADDRESS (City, State, and ZIP Code) 

2075 Robinson Laboratory 
206 W. 18th Ave 
Columbus, OH 43210 

NAME OF FUNDING SPONSOR'NG 

organization Ohio State 
iversity Research Found. 

8b OFFICE SYMBOL 
(If applicable) 

9 PROCUREMENT INSTRUMENT IDENTIFICATION NUMBER 

RF Project No. 716520 
RF Purchase Order No. 496549 

ADDRESS (City, State, and ZIP Code) 

314 Kinnear Road 
olumbus, OH 43212 

10. SOURCE OF FUNDING NUMBERS 

PROGRAM 
ELEMENT NO 

PROJECT 

NO 

TASK 

NO 

WORK UNIT 
ACCESSION NO 

l 

TITLE (Include Secur/ty Classification) A C0 MPUTER SIMULATION STUDY OF AN EXPERT SYST] 
OR WALKING MACHINE MOTION PLANNING 

EM 

i 

PERSONAL AUTHOR(S) 

GOODPASTURE , Richard P. 

a TYPE OF REPORT 13b TIME COVERED 

[aster's Thesis =ROM to 

14 DATE OF REPORT {Year, Month, Day) 15 PAGE COUNT 

1987 December 103 

SUPPLEMENTARY NCTA“ON 

COSATI CODES 

18 SUBJECT TERMS (Continue on reverse if necessary and identify by block number) 

Robotics, Walk motions, Adaptive Suspension 
Vehicle, Robot Motion Planning 

FIELD 

GROUP 

SUB-GROUP 

. ABSTRACT ( Continue on reverse if necessary and identify by block number) 

A basic algorithm for motion planning of an autonomous robotic 
vehicle is developed and presented in this study. The algorithm is 
implemented using simple rules in an expert system shell. This algorithm 
vill allow autonomous vehicles with only rudimentary sensory abilities 
So navigate from point A to point B with no previous knowledge of the 
terrain . For this study, the algorithm is implemented with a KEE expert 

1 DISTRIBUTION /AVAILABILITY OF ABSTRACT 

(2uNCLASSIFIED/UNLIM'”D □ SAME AS RPT □ DTIC USERS 

21 u A f<5ffii e ffT¥D aASSIFICATI0N 

a NAME OF RESPONSIBLE INDIVIDUAL 

Robert B. McGhee 

22b TELEPHONE 0 

(408) 646 

include Area Code ) 

.-2095 

^2c OFFICE SYMBOL 

52Mz 

D FORM 1 473, 84 WAR 83 APR edition may be used until exhausted. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF THIS p AGE 

All other editions are obsolete * u , s . Gove , nmen , p rln „n 9 om«, isss-sos-ia. 

1 UNCLASSIFIED 

UNCLASSIFIED 

SECURITY CL ASSI FI CATION OF THIS PAGE (Whan Dal* Entn»a) 

19 . Abstract (continued) 

system shell on a Texas Instrument Explorer Lisp machine and 
controls a color graphics computer simulation of the Ohio 
State University Adaptive Suspension Vehicle. 

s n 0102- lf- oi 4 - 6601 UNCLASSIFIED 

SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF THIS PAGEflFhan Data Enlaratf) 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

A Computer Simulation Study Of 
An Expert System For 
Walking Machine Motion Planning 

by 

Richard Pau^Goodpasture 
Lieutenant, United States Navy 
B.S., Eastern Kentucky University, 1980 

Submitted in partial fulfillment of the 
requirements for the degree of 

MASTER OF SCIENCE IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING 

from the 

NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL 
December 1987 

ABSTRACT 

A basic algorithm for motion planning of an autonomous robotic vehicle is 
developed and presented in this study. The algorithm is implemented using simple rules 
in an expert system shell. This algorithm will allow autonomous vehicles with only 
rudimentary sensory abilities to navigate from point A to point B with no previous 
knowledge of the terrain. For this study, the algorithm is implemented with a KEE 
expert system shell on a Texas Instrument Explorer Lisp machine and controls a color 
graphics computer simulation of the Ohio State University Adaptive Suspension Vehicle. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

l. INTRODUCTION 8 

A. GOALS 8 

B. THESIS ORGANIZATION 8 

II. SURVEY OF PREVIOUS WORK 10 

A. INTRODUCTION 10 

B. WALKING MACHINES 10 

C. ROBOT MOTION PLANNING 12 

1. Long Range Motion Planning 13 

2. Local Motion Planning 14 

D. GRAPHICAL SIMULATION OF ROBOTIC SYSTEMS 15 

E. COMMERCIAL EXPERT SYSTEM SHELLS 16 

F. SUMMARY 16 

m. DETAILED PROBLEM STATEMENT 1 8 

A. INTRODUCTION 18 

B. GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE ASV 18 

1. The Vehicle 18 

2. The Graphical Simulation 20 

C. TERRAIN SENSING 21 

D. THE MOTION PLANNING ALGORITHM 22 

E. SIMULATION HARDWARE FACILITIES 24 

F. SIMULATION SOFTWARE FACILITIES 25 

G. SUMMARY 26 

IV. DESCRIPTION OF THE SIMULATION 27 

A. INTRODUCTION 27 

B. COMMUNICATIONS SOFTWARE 27 

C. MOTION PLANNING KNOWLEDGE BASE 28 

D. USER’S GUIDE 31 

E. SUMMARY 33 

V. SIMULATION PERFORMANCE 34 

A. INTRODUCTION 34 

B. THE MOTION PLANNING PROGRAM 34 

C. THE COMMUNICATIONS PROGRAM 35 

D. SUMMARY 35 

VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 36 

A. RESEARCH CONTRIBUTIONS 36 

B. RESEARCH EXTENSIONS 37 

5 

APPENDIX A - THE SIMULATION PROGRAM CODE 40 

APPENDIX B - TRIAL RESULTS 94 

LIST OF REFERENCES 98 

INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST 100 

6 

LIST OF FIGURES 

4.1 Graph Of The AS V Knowledge Base 29 

4.2 Display Of The Internal Terrain Model 32 

7 

I. INTRODUCTION 

A. GOALS 

• The purpose of this study is to investigate a simple motion planning algorithm for 
navigation of autonomous robotic vehicles. The study will determine whether a motion 
planning algorithm can be implemented using basic rules within an expert system shell. 
The expert system shell chosen for this study is the KEE system by Intellicorp [1]. The 
robotic vehicle that was chosen for the study is the Adaptive Suspension Vehicle (ASV). 
The ASV is a hexapod walking machine that is currently being evaluated by Ohio State 
University for natural terrain locomotion [2]. The ASV is a Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA) sponsored proof of concept project. 

A secondary goal of the study is to develop the communications software necessary 
for the motion planning algorithm to communicate with the existing ASV computer 
graphics simulation presented by Lyman [3]. This will allow researchers to test new 
algorithms using the ASV graphics simulation model rather than the actual machine. 

B. THESIS ORGANIZATION 

Chapter II provides a brief summary of previous work relating to this study. It 
includes a discussion on the state of the art of walking machine technology, robotic 
motion planning, graphical simulations, and expert system shells. 

A detailed discussion of the motion planning problem is presented in Chapter in. 
The discussion includes a description of the ASV, the operator interface with ASV, and 
the terrain sensing ability of the ASV. Descriptions of the motion planning algorithm 

8 

and the hardware and software facilities used in the development of the algorithm are 
presented in the final sections of this chapter. 

A detailed description of the motion planning program’s operation is presented in 
Chapter IV. This includes a complete discussion of the communications software and of 
the motion planning knowledge base. The final section contains a user’s guide, which 
describes the operation of the program control and display features. 

Chapter V is a review of the performance of the motion planning algorithm. It 
includes examples of typical results, and performance characteristics of the simulation 
program. The final chapter provides a summary of the research contributions of this 
study, as well as possible extensions for future research. Portions of the program code 
are listed in the appendix. 

9 

n. SURVEY OF PREVIOUS WORK 

A. INTRODUCTION 

Research on mobile robots began in the late sixties with a few large projects in the 
United States and other countries to develop autonomous robots. Research slowed in the 
seventies, however, as several problems, such as vision, natural language, and motion 
planning proved harder to solve than expected. As these projects failed to produce all 
they had promised, interest waned and funding was reduced [4]. 

Recent years have witnessed important advances in research in image processing, 
natural language, and motion planning. These advances coupled with major 
breakthroughs in microprocessor technology, which allow tackling these problems in real 
time, have sparked renewed interest in all areas of robotics. One specific area of research 
receiving growing attention involves the problem of robot vehicle locomotion over rough 
terrain. Much of the work in this area has focused on the design and study of the 
kinematics and dynamics of multilegged robots [5j. 

B. WALKING MACHINES 

Researchers have been intrigued by legged vehicles or walking machines for the past 
several decades. This interest grew out observation of the great difference in the 
mobility of large animals when compared to wheeled or tracked vehicles, and has 
resulted in extensive research efforts. 

10 

Early efforts, such as the General Electric Quadruped [6], represented an important 
"proof of concept" for walking machines. In the case of the Quadruped, the legs were 
manually controlled by an operator without the aid of a computer. The many degrees of 
freedom provided by the legs resulted in such complexity that a highly skilled operator 
was required, and the vehicle proved difficult to operate for extended periods of time [6]. 
Advances in microcomputer technology and computer-aided simulation have helped 
solve this problem and significant progress has been made in recent years. Several 
promising designs have emerged including: the Perambulating Vehicle (PVII) at Tokyo 
Institute of Technology, the Camegie-Mellon University hexapod, the Odetics Inc. 
ODEX I, and the Adaptive Suspension Vehicle (ASV) developed at the Ohio State 
University [3]. 

The PVII was developed in 1980. It is a light weight laboratory model Quadruped, 
which features one of the first pantograph leg constructions designed specifically to 
•provide leg coordination and energy efficient walking. The PVII is able to probe for 
footholds and maneuver over obstacles with the aid of tactile foot sensors and a 
microcomputer mounted near the vehicle [3]. 

The Camegie-Mellon hexapod, developed in 1982, is a fully self-contained walking 
machine that is large enough to carry its operator. Its prime mover is a gasoline engine 
which provides power to the legs via a set of hydraulic actuators. Motion control is 
accomplished by an on-board microcomputer which interprets the driver’s commands 
and specifies the correct series of leg movement patterns to be used [3]. 

Odetics Inc. introduced a commercial design in 1983 called ODEX I. The ODEX I 
uses a unique circular arrangement of six planar pantograph legs. This arrangement 

II 

allows the vehicle to adjust its profile to negotiate narrow passages. The ODEX I is 
controlled by an operator via a radio or fiber optic link to an on-board supervisory 
microprocessor. Individual leg control is accomplished by a dedicated low-level 
microprocessor which receives commands from the supervisory microprocessor [3], 

The Adaptive Suspension Vehicle, developed at Ohio State University, is the first 
computer coordinated legged vehicle designed specifically for operation on natural 
terrain [2]. The ASV is a hexapod walking machine that is fully self-contained. It is 
capable of carrying a driver, a 500 pound internal payload, and a complete control and 
power system in an outdoor environment [3]. The ASV in its current configuration is not 
an autonomous robot. However, the mechanical and control technologies necessary for 
unmanned operation are available, and intensive efforts are underway to realize this 
capability [2]. A simple motion planning algorithm to control the ASV simulation model 
is presented in this study. 

C. ROBOT MOTION PLANNING 

Robot motion planning has been one of the central activities in the robotics research 
community for many years. Two broad categories of motion planning research have 
emerged. The first is the planning involved to enable a manipulator to avoid collisions in 
a cluttered workspace [7]. The second concerns planning necessary for mobile robot to 
move from point A to point B while avoiding obstacles. This study deals entirely with 
the latter type of motion planning and a brief summary of previous work in this area 
follows. 

Route planning is an important ability of any truly autonomous vehicle. It can be 

thought of in two basic classes, long range and local motion planning. The first class, 

12 

long range motion planning, generally requires some form of map, since the range of 
movement is greater than the on-board sensory ability of the vehicle. The second class, 
local motion planning, is generally restricted to planning movements within an area 
limited by the scanning range of the vehicle’s sensors. [8] 

1. Long Range Motion Planning 

There are many situations in which long range motion planning requires some 
degree of optimality. The problem to be solved in this case has been named the 
weighted-region problem [9]. It requires finding a minimum-cost path between a start 
and a goal which lie in the same cartesian plane. The problem assumes, as a given, that 
there exists an area-cost map that includes the start and goal and the minimum-cost path 
between them. The area-cost map is comprised of areas of equal cost-rate known as 
homogeneous-cost regions. The cost-rate is a measure of cost per unit distance, and is a 
generic measure in that it could be given in units of time, exposure to danger, fuel 
expended, or any other appropriate unit of measure. Cost rates are determined only for a 
specific vehicle and only in terms of location (that is, not in terms of heading or time). 
Thus, each homogeneous-cost region has a single cost-rate associated with it, and these 
cost-rates can be used to search for the minimum-cost path. [10] 

Various methods have been proposed to find the minimal-cost path. These 
methods are differentiated by their various control strategies. These strategies are said to 
be systematic if they are complete and non-redundant. A strategy that is complete is one 
that will find a solution, if one exists. A strategy that is non-redundant implies that the 
search will not explore any alternative more than once. N on-systematic strategies are 
those that do not meet the above criteria, and are not suitable for the weighted-region 

13 

problem. Two of the simplest systematic search strategies are depth-first search and 
breadth-first search. These strategies vary in the manner in which the nodes of the area- 
cost map are expanded. In breadth-first search, all nodes of the same depth are expanded 
before the search moves to a greater depth in the map. Depth-first search uses a different 
approach. In this strategy, a given node will be expanded until the goal is reached or 
until it can no longer be expanded. When the node can no longer be expanded, the 
search must backtrack to the last node that could be expanded, and continue from there. 
Either of these strategies can return the first solution they find or heuristics can be added 
to ensure that an optimal solution is determined. [10] 

Richbourg [10] presents an excellent overview of various advanced search 
strategies to find the minimal-cost path. These are based on the basic systematic 
strategies discussed above and include uniform-cost search, best-first search, and A* 
search. 

2. Local Motion Planning 

Local motion planning uses the same basic strategies as long range planning. 
However, the strategies are applied only to an area within scanning range of the vehicle’s 
sensors. In addition, a map of the area may not be available. In this case, one solution is 
to represent the local environment by a grid. The grid can be filled in as information is 
provided by on-board sensors and can be used for future planning. This technique is 
similar to that used by the Stanford Research Institute in their work on the SHAKEY 
robot [11]. This is the type of elementary planning chosen for this study. A detailed 
discussion of the algorithm used in the study is presented in Chapter III. 

14 

D. GRAPHICAL SIMULATION OF ROBOTIC SYSTEMS 

Recent advances in the computer industry have provided a wide variety of options 
from which to choose graphical displays for robotic systems. Decisions on which option 
to used must be based on a variety of factors. Questions to be asked include: 

- Will the simulation use a monochrome or color monitor? 

- Will the simulation use wire-frame or solid figure representation? 

- What type of projection and how many dimensions will be used? 

- What resolution and what update time is acceptable? 

- Is special hardware required? 

State of the art graphics systems also offer such options as shading, reflectivity of 
surfaces, and multiple light sources. Trade-offs must be made, when considering these 
options, between performance, visual realism, and cost. An effective simulation will 
involve a compromise between all the options, and will be system dependent [3]. 

Early simulation models of the ASV by Kwak [12] and Lee [13] concentrated on 
basic functionality in the display. The vehicles and terrain in these simulations were 
represented by basic wire-frame figures on monochrome monitors. The first realistic 
three dimensional simulation of the ASV was created by Lyman [3]. This simulation was 
written in the C programming language and was implemented on the IRIS-2400 graphics 
workstation [14]. The IRIS-2400 was chosen a good comprise between state of the art, 
cost, processing time, and availabilty [3]. The simulation provides a very realistic 
representation of the ASV and the operator interface. For this reason, this simulation was 
selected to support the work of this thesis. A more detailed discussion of graphics 
hardware and software is presented in Chapter III. 

15 

E. COMMERCIAL EXPERT SYSTEM SHELLS 

Traditional computer technology offers many powerful methods for solving 
problems that can be clearly and completely defined and have algorithmic solutions. In 
many cases however, the problem is difficult to define and these methods cannot be 
applied. In these cases experts are needed to gather and interpret data and select a 
strategy for solving the problem. Expert system shells are a relatively new type of 
software system designed to augment the decision processes of human experts. This new 
generation of software has been used in a variety of fields including disease diagnosis, 
circuit design, planning experiments, and equipment trouble-shooting [1]. A relatively 
recent development in the robotics research field is the use of expert systems shells to 
perform the higher level control and planning functions of robots. Although there are 
many of these expert system shells available, the two most widely used are KEE by 
Intellicorp [1] and ART by Inference Corporation [15]. Both provide powerful 
development systems, that are easy to use, provide for ra'pid prototyping, and have a 
variety of knowledge representation facilities. They each organize the data into a 
knowledge base, and have rule systems for rule-based reasoning about the knowledge 
base. Additionally, each offers a powerful monochrome graphics interface. Due to the 
availability of KEE on the machines used for this study, and the user friendliness of KEE, 
it was chosen as the expert system for this study. 

F. SUMMARY 

This chapter presents background information on previous research relevant to this 
study. Included are brief surveys of the state of the art of walking machines, and robot 

motion planning. In addition, there is a section on selection of graphical displays for 

16 

robot simulations, and a section discussing the use commercial systems for high level 
control of robot systems. 

The following chapter contains a more detailed discussion of the ASV, and the 
planning problem to be solved in this thesis. 

17 

III. DETAILED PROBLEM STATEMENT 

A. INTRODUCTION 

The development of an expert system based motion planning algorithm for an 
autonomous vehicle is the major objective of this study. The second objective is the 
development of the communication software necessary for the expert system to 
communicate with the vehicle simulation. For purposes of this study, the vehicle was 
simulated by an existing graphical simulation of the ASV. 

This chapter presents a detailed discussion of the various aspects of the problems 
presented above. In it is a general discussion of the ASV and of the graphical simulation 
of the ASV. Also covered are the terrain sensing abilities of the ASV and the motion 
planning algorithm. The final sections include a description of the simulation facilities 
used in this study. 

B. GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE ASV 

1. The Vehicle 

The Adaptive Suspension Vehicle (ASV) was completed at Ohio State 
University in 1985. The ASV is the first self-contained, computer coordinated legged 
vehicle designed to traverse natural terrain. The vehicle is 3.0 meters in height, 5.2 
meters in length and weighs approximately 8000 pounds including the driver, the optical 
scanner mounted on top of the cab, the fuel and hydraulic fluids, and a 500 pound 

18 

internal payload. Power for the ASV is provided by a single 900 cc four-cylinder 
motorcycle engine. This engine drives an energy storage flywheel from which power is 
distributed to eighteen hydraulic actuator pumps through a series of quill shafts and 
toothed belts. [2] 

On-board processing and control are accomplished by the ASV with an 
advanced computer system consisting of thirteen Intel single-board computers and two 
special purpose computers. Three Intel 86/30 computers provide for leg servo control, 
with each board controlling two legs. One Intel 86/30 and one 80386 board plan 
trajectories for individual legs. Two 86/30 boards cooperate to realize inertial navigation 
and safety functions. One 86/30 board monitors operator inputs while two more generate 
body motion commands and close a body servo loop. All of these processors are linked 
via a multibus. 

A second multibus links the remaining five computers. One of the special 
purpose computers generates the internal terrain model from optical radar data. Another 
computer generates an optimal distribution of forces amoung supporting legs and 
processes force feedback information to assist the body servo computer located in the 
first multibus cluster. Two Intel 86/30 boards plan leg sequencing and the associated 
body trajectory. The last computer in this cluster provides a graphics display to the 
vehicle operator. The two multibus clusters are connected by a parallel data link [2]. 

Currently, the ASV is controlled by an operator sitting in the cab at the front of 
the vehicle. The operator can control the vehicle either at a supervisory level by 
selecting body translational and rotational velocities and allowing the vehicle to 
automatically place the feet, or in a precision-footing mode by coordinating the 

19 

individual legs. The other various control modes are discussed in detail in [2]. The 
operator selects the control mode and provides control input to the system via a keypad 
and joystick located in the cockpit. The joystick is used to provide continuous rate 
control for longitudinal, lateral, and turning motion. In addition, two thumb operated 
mini-joysticks provide intermittent rate control for the remaining three degrees of 
freedom of the body. The operator receives vehicle status information via two CRT 
displays and a set of LED bar gages mounted in the ceiling of the cab. Changes in the 
displays and operator interface used for the graphical simulation are discussed in the next 
section. [2] 

2. The Graphical Simulation 

The graphical simulation used in this study was developed by Lyman [3]. It 
incorporates many features that provide a realistic simulation of the ASV including 
omnidirectional control, automatic body altitude and attitude control, leg motion 
planning, and body deceleration. Although the simulation models only the kinematics of 
the ASV, filters were added between operator inputs and vehicle reactions to provide the 
operator with more realistic vehicle dynamics. [3] 

The simulation was developed in a modular form which provides a very flexible 
environment for studying various control algorithms. While the simulation provides two 
modes of operation, forward-wave gait and follow-the-leader gait, only the forward- 
wave gait was used in this study. In this mode the program’s displays and three-axis 
control inputs are controlled with a mouse and menu system instead of the joystick used 
in the actual vehicle. [3] 

20 

For this study the simulation program’s main loop, walk.c, and the command 
subroutine, driver. c, were modified to incorporate the necessary communication software 
needed to receive command inputs from the motion planning algorithm [3]. A more 
detailed discussion of the hardware and software facilities used in the study is presented 
in the final sections of this chapter. 

C. TERRAIN SENSING 

Terrain sensing abilities are a necessity for any truly autonomous vehicle. These 
abilities can be as elaborate as state of the art radar vision systems, or as simple as basic 
tactile sensors. These sensors may provide a detailed global view of the terrain, or 
simply a limited local representation of the terrain. The algorithm presented in this study 
requires only local sensing of the terrain and a discussion of the ASV’s local sensing 
abilities follows. 

The main terrain sensor of the ASV is an optical scanning rangefinder mounted on 
top of the cab. The scanner uses a GaAlAs laser diode and mechanical mirrors to sweep 
over the terrain and provide azimuth angle coverage of approximately 40 degrees to 
either side of the ASV’s longitudinal axis and elevation angle coverage of -15 degrees 
from the horizon to -75 degrees. The range from the scanner to the terrain is determined 
by transmitting a sinusoidally modulated laser beam and measuring the phase difference 
between the transmitted and reflected signals. The maximum range of the optical 
scanner is approximately 10 meters [2]. 

In addition to the above scanner, the ASV has other sensors to control its legs. 
These include three tachometers, three potentiometers, and three differential pressure 
sensors located in the actuators for each leg. These sensors are connected to the leg 

21 

computers which use the sensor data to determine velocity, position, and ground reaction 
force information for each leg. It is the differential pressure detector that can be used as 
a simple tactile sensor to test the terrain for firm footholds [2]. The sensors discussed 
above only produce information about the ASV’s local environment. However, 
information from either can be used as an input to the motion planning algorithm 
presented in the next section, depending on the how the terrain is to be represented 
internally. 

D. THE MOTION PLANNING ALGORITHM 

The motion planning algorithm presented in this study provides a simple means by 
which an autonomous vehicle with only local sensory abilities can navigate from one 
point to another while avoiding obstacles. The algorithm was developed using simple 
rules based on observations of how insects and other small animals appear to plan their 
motions. A discussion of the algorithm’s representation of the terrain and a discussion of 
the rules which form the basis of the algorithm follows. 

The internal terrain model for the algorithm is represented by a rectangular grid with 
nodes which can be marked to indicate the state of the node. The nodes can have three 
possible states: unexplored, trail, and obstacle. Unexplored implies that the node has not 
been sensed by any of the vehicle’s sensors. A trail node is one which has been used as 
part of the path to the goal, and is also used for backtracking. A node is represented as an 
obstacle once one of the vehicle’s sensors has determined that the vehicle cannot safely 
travel to the physical location represented by the node, or once it has been used for 
backtracking. In addition to the states mentioned above, the terrain model also represents 
one node as the start node, and can determine if a node is the goal node. 

22 

The basic rules for the algorithm were written with several objectives in mind. It 
was desired that the algorithm find a path to the goal if one existed, and that the 
algorithm would not search a failed path more than once. The latter goal was met by not 
allowing the vehicle to cross its own trail, while the first goal was met by using 
chronological backtracking as used in Prolog. This resulted in a depth-first search 
algorithm that will for a finite terrain be guaranteed to find a path to the goal if one or 
more exist. The resulting rules are shown below: 

Rule 1: 

If the current node is not the goal node, and if one or more neighboring nodes are 
unexplored and not an obstacle, move to the unexplored node closest in angle to the 
goal node and mark the current position as a trail node. 

Rule 2: 

If there are no unexplored nodes that are not obstacles, and the current node is not 
the goal or start node, mark the current node obstacle and backtrack to the previous 
trail node. 

Rule 3: 

If the current node is the goal node, halt and report success. 

Rule 4: 

If the current node is the start node, and there are no unexplored nodes that are not 
obstacle nodes, halt and report failure. 

While the above rules are quite simple, the knowledge base to implement them 
turned out to be suprisingly lengthy. A detailed discussion of the knowledge base used to 
implement the above algorithm and the graphical representation of the internal terrain 
model used by the algorithm is presented in Chapter IV. 

23 

E. SIMULATION HARDWARE FACILITIES 

The computer algorithm presented in this study is designed to operate on any 
computer system that supports Intellicorp’s KEE expert system software. The computer 
system chosen for this study is the Texas Instrument Explorer Lisp machine [16]. The 
Explorer system is an advanced, single user workstation. It provides extensive support 
for development of complex programs, and is a very affordable system for any 
application requiring symbolic processing, high quality monochrome graphics, and 
special-purpose processors. The programming environment of the Explorer includes a 
high-resolution, interactive display, high speed processing using the Lisp language, a 
ZMACS editor, networking facilities, and a large memory capacity with a sophisticated 
memory management system. [16] 

The simulation that the algorithm controls is designed to run on a Silicon Graphics, 
Inc. IRIS-2400 workstation. The IRIS systems are state-of-the-art graphics workstations 
that consist of a Geometry Pipeline, general purpose microprocessor, a raster subsystem, 
a high-resolution RGB display monitor and a mouse and keyboard. The power of the 
IRIS comes from the Geometry Pipeline which consists of a series of custom VLSI chip 
matrix multipliers. It performs matrix transformations, clipping, and scaling of 
coordinates, and then sends output to the raster subsystem which performs functions such 
as filling in pixels, shading, depth-cueing, and hidden surface removal. The above 
functions enable graphics simulations to work in real time which greatly enhance their 
realism [3]. 

The above systems are connected by means of an Ethernet network and both use 
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) as communications software. 

24 

A more detailed discussion of the communication facilities of the machines will be 

presented in Chapter IV. Other software facilities that were used in this study are 
discussed in the next section. 

F. SIMULATION SOFTWARE FACILITIES 

The ASV simulation on the IRIS-2400 is written entirely in the C programing 
language using IRIS graphics library [3]. The required communications software for the 
IRIS side of the simulation was also written in C, and consists of calls to subroutines 
which are be linked to the main program. The specific subroutines are discussed in 
Chapter IV. 

The planning algorithm presented in this study was written KEE. KEE uses a 
frame-based representation of objects and their attributes to form a knowledge base. The 
attributes can be either descriptive or procedural in form. There are five basic building 
blocks used to build a frame in KEE. These are units, slots, slot values, facets, and facet 
values. The units represent objects in a knowledge base, while slots represent attributes 
of the units. The values of these attributes are represented by the slot values. Facets are 
similarly used to describe slots. [1] 

The real power of KEE comes from the ability to associate descriptive and 
procedural attributes directly with the objects in a frame. This is called object-oriented 
programming and provides KEE with modularity and rapid prototyping ability. This 
object-orientation is a unifying factor in KEE. Rule-based reasoning, access to Lisp, 
graphics, and deamons are all object-oriented in KEE. KEE provides full access to the 
power of Lisp through user defined functions called methods. A method is a Lisp 

function which is situated in the knowledge base as the value of a slot. Using methods as 

25 

slot values implies that the actions defined become part of the structure of the knowledge 
base, and enables units with actions to perform to communicate with each other and to 
execute actions in response to one another. [1] 

The object-oriented programming facilities of KEE provided for rapid development 
of the knowledge base for the planning algorithm and allowed the use of methods to 
access Lisp functions written to communicate with the IRIS graphics simulation. 

G. SUMMARY 

This chapter provides a detailed discussion of the problems considered for this study. 
It includes a general discussion of the ASV and its terrain sensing abilities. Additionally, 
the motion planning algorithm used in this study is presented, along with the hardware 
and software facilities used. 

26 

IV. DESCRIPTION OF THE SIMULATION 

A. INTRODUCTION 

This chapter presents a description of the simulation program used in this study. The 
first section discusses the communications software required for the different parts of the 
simulation to communicate with each other. The second section provides a detailed look 
at the knowledge base used for motion planning and introduces the KEE working 
environment. The final section of the chapter presents the user’s guide for the 
simulation. It contains complete instructions on how to use each of the different program 
modules for the simulation. 

B. COMMUNICATIONS SOFTWARE 

The communications software developed in this study consists of two very distinct 
software packages. One is necessary to run the server side of the simulation on the IRIS 
workstation and is written in C, while the other is required to run the client portion of the 
simulation on the TI Explorer and is written in Lisp. 

The software package on the IRIS side, consists of modifications to the main loop, 
walk.c, and the control subroutine, driver. c [3], These modifications include the addition 
of a queuing subroutine which checks for commands from the motion planner and puts 
any instructions received on a queue. The queue is polled each time through the main 
loop and if the queue has data, the commands will be executed. The remainder of the 
communications software on the IRIS side consists of routines developed by Major Ted 
Barrow at the Naval Postgraduate School. 

27 

The communications package on the TI Explorer side of the simulation is built using 
an instantiation of the IP::TCP-HANDLER flavor available in the IP/TCP software 
package [16]. Additionally, functions and methods are used to provide the overhead 
required to interface with the IRIS communications software and to simplify the interface 
with the KEE software. The software package is written to run in the normal Lisp 
Listener environment of the TI Explorer or in the KEE environment. However, it is 
necessary to load the software in the environment it is to be used in. Provisions are 
included in the motion planning knowledge base to load the communications package 
into the KEE environment. The Lisp code for the communications package is provided 
in Appendix A. 

C. MOTION PLANNING KNOWLEDGE BASE 

The motion planning knowledge base presented consists of the units and slots 
required to implement the basic rules presented in Chapter III, and to provide the 
graphical display of the terrain model. The knowledge base should not be viewed as a 
static system, but as an ever-changing environment. Units have been added to the 
knowledge base or modified as necessary to expand the terrain model or implement new 
rules. A graph of the knowledge base showing the relationship of the units in the 
knowledge is shown in Figure 4.1. It is important to note that units in KEE are of two 
distinct types, parent and child, and that these two types of units are represented 
differently on the graph of the knowledge base. Parent links are shown with solid lines 
and child links are shown with dashed lines. This is important because only the units that 
are children can receive messages to activate slot values or methods [1]. A discussion of 
the main units and their slots follows. 

28 

Figure 4.1 Graph Of The AS V Knowledge Base 

29 

The COMMANDERS unit represents a class of units which form the highest level of 
control in the knowledge base. At present, the COMMANDERS unit has only one child, 
the ASV-COMMANDER unit. This unit contains slots which initialize the terrain model 
and which send messages to other units to perform the motion planning. The knowledge 
base is written so that other commander units could be added at a latter time if different 
types of control schemes are to be considered. 

The actual motion planning and execution involves several units. The first of these 
is the DRIVERS unit. This unit simulates the sensing abilities of the AS V. The DRIVERS 
unit also has only one child unit, ASV-DRIVER. It contains slots which simulate vision 
inputs, such as relative position and angle to the goal, to the motion planner. The ASV- 
DRIVER unit also contains slots which send messages to the DRIVING JiULES unit, once 
the vision slot has performed its function. The DRIVING JIULES unit forms the rule 
class for the knowledge base and contains all of the actual rules necessary to implement 
the four basic rules from Chapter III. The rules are written in the tell and ask 
language [1]. Each of these rules is checked against the facts in the knowledge base to 
determine if the conditions of the rule are satisfied. If they are, then the actions required 
by the rule are executed by sending messages to the appropriate units. 

The units that receive messages from the rules are the VEHICLES units. The ASV 
vehicle unit has slots which move the vehicle in the internal terrain model and send the 
messages necessary to move the graphical simulation on the IRIS-2400. 

The NODES unit represents a class of units which form the internal terrain model. 
These units have slots for recording the different states of the node and information about 
its four nearest neighbor nodes. The child units of the NODES unit consist of 

30 

KEEPICTURE [1] units required to display the terrain model on the TI Explorer CRT. 
The resulting display is shown in Figure 4.2. 

The remaining units concern the communications with the IRIS simulation of the 
ASV. The IRIS.COMMS unit has two child units, INITIAUZE.COMMS, and TALK. The 
first of these has slots which load the Lisp code necessary to communicate with the IRIS 
into the KEE world. The latter contains slots which send appropriate messages to the 
IRIS simulation to move the ASV. 

The entire code for the knowledge base is too extensive to include in this thesis. 
Therefore the portion of the knowledge base dealing with the display of the terrain model 
has been omitted. The remainder of the code is included in Appendix A. 

D. USER’S GUIDE 

The motion planning knowledge base is relatively easy to use, providing the user has 
a basic understanding of the TI Explorer and the KEE expert system shell. This 
following presentation assumes this basic understanding. 

The user must first verify that the KEE environment has been loaded into the TI. 
This is accomplished by noting the KEE trademark symbol at the top of the display in the 
Lisp Listener environment. The KEE shell is then selected by entering SYSTEM-K on 
the keyboard. Once in the KEE shell, the user will see the display shown in Figure 4.1. 
The user then selects the key shown in Figure 4.1 with the mouse and picks LOAD 
KNOWLEDGE BASE. At the prompt, goodpasturer;asv2.u #2 is entered and the 
knowledge base is loaded into the system. This requires approximately 17 minutes. 
When asked if KEE. VIEWPORTS are desired, the user should answer yes by clicking 

the left mouse button, and the necessary viewports to run the simulation will be 

31 

o 

o 

o 

■■ 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

Figure 4.2 Display Of The Internal Terrain Model 

32 

displayed. The communication software is loaded by mousing the LOAD- 
IRIS. FLAVORS actuator shown in Figure 4.1. The user must now start the IRIS ASV 
simulation. This is accomplished by entering the command "walk" at the IRIS prompt in 
the directory containing the simulation [3]. Once the IRIS simulation has started, the 
user completes the communication link by mousing the INITIALIZE. COMMS actuator 
shown in Figure 4.1. The simulation can now be started by mousing the START - 
WALKER actuator shown in Figure 4.1. Once the ASV has reached the goal, the terrain 
model can be initialized by mousing the INITIALIZE-TERRAIN actuator shown in Figure 
4.1 and following prompts. Once the user is finished with the simulation, he must 
disconnect the communications link by mousing DISCONNECT. COMMS. This shuts 
down the IRIS simulation and the communication software. The user can then continue 
working in KEE or reboot for the next user by entering META-CONTROL-META- 
CONTROL-RUBOUT on the keyboard. 

E. SUMMARY 

This chapter presents a description of the simulation used in this study. The first 
section describes the communications software used in the study. It includes a discussion 
of the software used on both the IRIS and TI sides of the simulation. The next section 
presents a detailed description of the motion planning knowledge base used in the 
simulation. The final section provides a user’s guide to the operation of the simulation. 
The following chapter presents a description of the simulation performance. 

33 

V. SIMULATION PERFORMANCE 

A. INTRODUCTION 

This chapter presents a performance evaluation of the simulation program developed 
in this study. It includes a section on the performance of the motion planning program 
and a section on the performance of the communications software used to link the motion 
planner to a graphical simulation of the ASV. This review is largely subjective and is 
based on the author’s experience with the operation of the simulation. 

B . THE MOTION PLANNING PROGRAM 

The motion planning program developed during the study was tested with a variety 
of different obstacle patterns. The graphical display of the internal terrain model made it 
very easy to monitor the progress of the program and to determine if the proper decisions 
were made. In each case, all aspects of the program functioned properly. Several 
examples of the terrain model displays showing different start patterns and results are 
included in Appendix B. 

The motion planning knowledge base was also run on the SYMBOLICS 3675 Lisp 
machine. The program also performed properly in each case tested, and ran 
approximately six times faster. Unfortunately differences in software, and poor 
documentation, prohibited testing the motion planning program on the SYMBOLICS 
machine with the IRIS simulation. However, the improved speed on the SYMBOLICS 
machine indicates that further research into the communications problem would prove 
fruitful. 

34 

C. THE COMMUNICATIONS PROGRAM 

The communications software used for the study is still under development, but 
provides reliable basic communications ability. The package supports sending and 
receiving of characters, floating point numbers, and integers on both machines. The only 
limitation noted was the inability to receive negative numbers on the Lisp side. This 
ability was not used in this study and will have to be added if needed for future research. 

The communications package was not implemented on the SYMBOLICS Lisp 
machine because of basic differences in the IP/TCP software and the lack of 
documentation. Therefore, no comparison could be made of the total simulation when 
run on the different machines. However, based on the observations of the motion 
planning knowledge base when run on the SYMBOLICS, the author believes that the 
total simulation on the SYMBOLICS and the IRIS would run more efficiently. 

D. SUMMARY 

This chapter presents an overview of the performance of the motion planning 
program and the communications package developed during this study. It includes a 
brief discussion of the abilities and limitations of the simulation. The successful 
demonstration of these programs indicates that further research in both areas will be 
profitable. 

35 

VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 

This thesis demonstrates new techniques for developing robot control and planning 
programs by means of computer simulations. These techniques involve the use of expert 
systems to perform the higher level functions of the simulation and the use of specialized 
computers to perform the more specialized lower level functions of the simulation, such 
as three dimensional color graphics. 

A rule-based motion planning system is developed in this thesis using the KEE 
expert system shell [1] on a Texas Instrument Explorer Lisp machine [16]. With this 
system, an autonomous vehicle with no map and only limited sensory abilities can find a 
path to a known goal while avoiding obstacles. 

A communications package is also presented in this study which allows the above 
expert system to control an existing computer simulation of the Ohio State University 
ASV robotic vehicle [3]. The techniques developed during this study are intended to be 
used as generic tools for research in the fields of autonomous vehicles and robotic system 
simulation. 

A. RESEARCH CONTRIBUTIONS 

Previous research in the area of robotic system simulation has been concerned with 
such problems as control, kinematics, and graphical representation of the robot. In some 
cases, conventional computers were used, resulting in simulations that worked, but with 
program code that was not understandable at a high level. In other cases, specialized 
computers such as Lisp machines were used for high level control, but at the expense of 

36 

poor graphics displays. There is a need for techniques that will integrate the 

- 

conventional and specialized computers and allow each to perform the functions of a 
simulation that they do best. 

The simulation presented in this study demonstrates several techniques for 
maximizing the potential of a robotic simulation. The first part of the simulation 
involved the development of a rule-based motion planning program which can be used to 
control an autonomous vehicle with only limited sensory abilities and no map of the 
environment. 

The second part of the simulation involved developing the software package 
required for the motion planning program to communicate with a graphical simulation on 
a different computer. The successful demonstration of this ability is an important 
milestone in robotic research. It will allow future research to use expert systems for high 
level control of computer simulations on specialized graphics machines or for high level 
control of conventional computers on actual autonomous vehicles. 

Although both of these techniques are demonstrated with a very basic example, the 

techniques used can be applied to much more complicated examples. These tools 

.. 

provide a notable enhancement to the simulation techniques available for robotics 
research. 

B. RESEARCH EXTENSIONS 

The work presented in this study involved several different fields of study, and 
because of this there are several directions which might be pursued in future research. 
These fall into three major areas which might be pursued: control of the ASV, 

37 

improvement of the motion planning program, and the SYMBOLICS Lisp machine’s 
communication difficulties. 

There are several areas in which the control of the ASV simulation can be improved. 
These include providing the ability to turn the vehicle and the ability to move the vehicle 
diagonally. Additionally, the ability to start the ASV simulation at a position similar to 
that of the representation in the internal terrain model could be added. Both of the 
abilities would add to the realism and practicality of the simulation. 

The motion planning program can also be extended in several ways. In particular, 
eight neighbors could be considered instead of the present four and the vehicle could be 
allowed to move diagonally. Additionally, some higher level abstractions might be used 
to reduce the number of actual rules required for the program. Other improvements to be 
considered include using other rule sets. These rules sets might allow path crossing as an 
alternative to backtracking if the vehicle could see further ahead and determine that path 
crossing was more efficient than backtracking. Additionally, rules sets could be 
implemented that would allow for trail following instead of trail blazing and allow for 
shortcuts over known paths. All of these possibilities could be considered along with 
general streamlining to improve program efficiency. 

Another possible extension involves the use of the SYMBOLICS Lisp machine for 
the motion planning program. Initial estimates indicate that the program runs 
approximately six times faster than on the TI Explorer. This indicates that efforts in this 
area would prove fruitful. The additional problem to be solved in this case is the 
development of a communication link between the SYMBOLICS and the IRIS-2400. 

38 

The techniques demonstrated in this thesis open many possibilities for future 
research. It is hoped that these techniques will provide for more efficient and rapid 
development of robotic systems. 

39 

APPENDIX A - THE SIMULATION PROGRAM CODE 

;;;THIS IS PROGRAM IRIS2-FLAVOR.LISP 
;;;IT PROVIDES THE NECESSARY OVERHEAD 
;;;ON THE TI EXPLORER TO COMMUNICATE 
;;;WITH THE IRIS-2400 
;;;IT MUST BE LOADED IN THE WORLD IN 
;;;WHICH COMMUNICATIONS ARE TO BE USED 

(defmacro loopfor (var init test expl &optional exp2 exp3 exp4 exp5) 
‘(prog 0 

(setq ,var ,init) 
tag 
,expl 
,exp2 
,exp3 
,exp4 
,exp5 

(setq ,var (1+ ,var)) 

(if (= ,var .test) (return t) (go tag)))) 

;;; handy macro to have in the send message farthur down 

(defun convert-number-to-string (n) 

(princ-to-string n)) 

(defun convert-string-to-integer (str &optional (radix 10)) 

(do «j0(+jl)) 

(n 0 (+ (* n radix) (digit-char-p (char str j) radix)))) 

((= j (length str)) n))) 

(defun find-period-index (str) 

(catch ’exit 

(dotimes (x (length str) nil) 

(if (equal (char str x) (char 0)) 

(throw ’exit x))))) 

40 

(dcfun get-leftside-of-real (sir &optional (radix 10)) 

(do (O' 0(1+ j)) 

(n 0 (+ (* n radix) (digit-char-p (char str j) radix)))) 

((or (null (digit-char-p (char str j) radix)) (= j (length str))) n))) 

(defun get-rightside-of-real (str &optional (radix 10)) 

(do ((index (1+ (find-period-index str)) (1+ index)) 

(factor 0.10 (* factor 0.10)) 

(n 0.0 (+ n (* factor (digit-char-p (char str index) radix))))) 

((= index (length str)) n ))) 

(defun convert-string-to-real (str &optional (radix 10)) 

(+ (float (get-leftside-of-real str radix)) (get-rightside-of-real str radix))) 

(defvar *tcp-handlerl* (send ip::*tcp-handler* :get-port)) 
(dcfvar *tcp-handler2* (send ip::*tcp-handler* :get-port)) 

(defvar * iris 1 -port 1* 1027) 

(dcfvar * iris l-port2* 1026) 

(defvar * iris 1 -address* 3221866502) 
(dcfvar *iris2-addrcss* 3221866504) 
(dcfvar *unixl -address* 3221866505) 
(dcfvar *unix2-addrcss* ) 

; this is the send port 
; this is the receive port 

; tep-ip or internet address 
; look in network configuration 

(defun choose-iris(x) ; iris2 is default 

(cond ((equal x ’irisl) (defvar *dest-address* *irisl-address*)) 
((equal x ’iris3) (defvar *dest-address* *iris3-address*)) 

(t (defvar *dest-address* *iris2-address*)))) 

(defflavor conversation-with-iris ((talking-port-number *irisl-portl*) 
(listening-port-number *irisl-port2*) 
(talking-port *tcp-handlerl*) 

(listening-port *tcp-handler2*) 

(destination *dest-address*) 

) 

0 

igettable-instance-variables 

41 

:settable-instance-variables 

rinitable-instance-variables) 

(dcfmelhod (conversation-with-iris :initiate-the-conversation) 0 
(progn 

(send talking-port :open 

:active ; tcp will begin the procedure to establish 

; connection (default vs :passive) 
talking-port-number ; port number of destination host 
destination ; machine name or address if blank and 

; in ipassive mode local machine waits for 
; connection 

30) *; set max seconds before read request times out 

(send listening-port :open 

ractive ;:passive 

listening-port-number 

destination 

30) 

’"A conversation with the iris machine has been established")) 

(defmethod (conversation-with-iris :re-use-iris) 0 
(setq *tcp-handlerl* (send ip::*tcp-handler* :get-port) 

*tcp-handler2* (send ip::*tcp-handler* :get-port) 
talking-port *tcp-handlerl* 
listening-port *tcp-handler2*)) 

(defmethod (conversation-with-iris :get-an-object-from-iris) 0 
(let* ((typebuffer " ") 

(lengthbuffer " ") 

(buffer " ") 

(buffer-length 1)) 

(progn 

(send listening-port rreceive 
typebuffer 

42 

buffer-length 

30 

:wait) 

(send listening-port .‘receive 
lengthbuffer 
4 

30 

:wait) 

(setq buffer-length (convcrt-string-to-intcgcr lengthbuffer)) 

; (terpri) 

; (princ "type to receive= ") (princ typebuffer) 

; (terpri) 

(setq buffer (make-string buffer-length :initia]-elcment (character 32))) 

(send listening-port ireceive 
buffer 

buffer-length 

30 

:wait) 

; (terpri) 

; (princ "data received= ") (princ buffer) 

; (terpri) 

(cond ((equal typebuffer "1") (convert-string-to-integer buffer)) 

((equal typebuffer "R") (convert-string-to-real buffer)) 

((equal typebuffer "C") buffer) 

(t nil))))) 

(dcfvar *step-var* 0) 

(defmethod (conversation-with-iris :scnd-iris-an-object) (object) 

(let* ((buffer (cond 

43 

((equal (type-of object) ’bignum) (convert-number-to-string object)) 
((equal (type-of object) ’fixnum) (convert-number-to-string object)) 
((equal (type-of object) ’float) (convert-number-to-string object)) 
((equal (type-of object) ’string) object) 

(t "error"))) 

(buffer-length (length buffer)) 

(typcbuffer (cond ((equal (type-of object) ’bignum) "I") 

((equal (type-of object) ’fixnum) "I") 

((equal (type-of object) ’float) "R") 

((equal (type-of object) ’string) "C") 

(t "C"))) 

(lengthbuffer (convert-number-to-string buffer-length))) 

(progn 

(terpri) 

(princ "type sent = ") (princ typebuffcr) 
(terpri) 

(send talking-port rsend 
typebuffer 
1 

nil 

nil) 

(if (= (length lengthbuffer) 4) 
(send talking-port :send 
lengthbuffer 
4 

nil 

nil) 

44 

(progn 

(loopfor *step-var* (length lengthbuffer) 4 
(send talking-port :send "0" 1 nil nil)) 

; (terpri) 

; (princ "length sent ") (princ lengthbuffer) 

; (terpri) 

(send talking-port :send lengthbuffer (length lengthbuffer) nil nil) 

)) 

; (terpri) 

; (princ "data sent= ") (princ buffer) 

(terpri) 

; (princ "data length= ") (princ buffer-length) 

; (terpri) 

(send talking-port :send 
buffer 

buffer-length 

t 

nil)))) 

(choose-iris 2) 

(defmethod (conversation-with-iris :stop-talking-to-iris) 0 
(progn (send talking-port :close) (send listening-port :close))) 

(setq talk (make-instance ’conversation-with-iris)) 

(defun start-con 0 (send talk :initiate-the-conversation)) 

(defun end-con 0 (send talk :stop-talking-to-iris)) 

(defun restart 0 (send talk :re-use-iris)) 

(defun get_data 0 

(send talk :get-an-object-from-iris)) 

(defun send_float (float) 

45 

(send talk :send-iris-an-object float)) 

(defun send_string (string) 

(send talk :send-iris-an-object string)) 

(defun ax 0 (send talk :send-iris-an-object "e")) 

(defun ay 0 (send talk :send-iris-an-object ”n")) 

(dcfun f 0 (send talk :send-iris-an-objecl T’)) 

(defun r 0 (send talk :send-iris-an-object "r")) 

(dcfun h 0 (send talk :send-iris-an-object "h")) 

(defun s 0 (send talk :send-iris-an-object "z")) 

(defun dx 0 (send talk :send-iris-an-object "w")) 

(defun dy 0 (send talk :send-iris-an-object "s")) 

(dcfun rlO (send talk :send-iris-an-object "rl")) 

(defun rr 0 (send talk :send-iris-an-object "rr")) 

(defun start-con 0 (send talk :initiate-the-conversation)) 
(defun end-con 0 (send talk :stop-talking-to-iris)) 

46 

;;; Mode: Common-Lisp; Syntax:Common-lisp; Package:KEE; Base: 10. 

(ASV 

("goodpasturer" "9-10-87 13:49:01" "goodpasturer” ”12-3-87 10:52:05") 

NIL 

(KNOWLEDGEBASES) 

NIL 

0 

( 

(DELETE.KB ((BEFORE (BEFORE-AI3-KB-DELETE SELF)) (BEFORE (BEFORE-KP-KB-DELETE SELF)))) 
(KBMETHODFILE ("ASV")) 

(KBSIZE (61)) 

(KEE.DEVELOPMENT.VERSION.NUMBER (0)) 

(KEE.MAJOR.VERSION.NUMBER (3)) 

(KEE.MINOR.VERSION.NUMBER ("05")) 

(KEE.PATCH.VERSION.NUMBER (73)) 

(KEE VERSION (KEE3.0)) 

(LOAD.KB ((AFTER (AFTER-AI3-KB-LOAD SELF)) (AFTER (AFTER-KP-KB-LOAD SELF)))))) 

(NODES 

("goodpasturer" "12-3-87 10:39:07" "goodpasturer" "12-3-87 10:51:36") 

((ENTITIES GENERICUNITS)) 

(TERRAIN2 (CLASSES GENERICUNITS)) 

NIL 

((EAST (NIL)) 

(EAST.PATH NIL NIL ((ONE.OF CLEAR OBSTRUCTED EXPLORED)) NIL 

47 

((CARDINALITY. MIN (1)) (CARDIN ALITY.MAX (1)))) 

(FIND .EAST 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT 
’EAST 

(PICTURE-AT-POSITION-IN- VIEWPORT ’TANK- WORLD 

(ADD-POS ITION-TO-POS ITION (FIND-POSITION-IN- VIEWPORT 
THISUNIT 
’TANK-WORLD) 

(GET. VALUE 
’CIRCLE.2 
’POSITION)))))) 

METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES])) 

(FIND .NORTH 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT 
’NORTH 

(PICTURE- AT-POS ITION-IN-VIEWPORT ’TANK-WORLD 

(ADD-POS ITION-TO-POSITION (FIND-POSITION-IN- VIEWPORT 
THISUNIT 
’TANK-WORLD) 

(GET. VALUE 
’CIRCLE. 11 
’POSITION)))))) 

METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES])) 

(FIND. SOUTH 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT 
’SOUTH 

(PICTURE-AT-POSITION-IN- VIEWPORT ’TANK-WORLD 

(SUBTR ACT-POSITION-FROM-POSITION (FIND-POS ITION-IN-VIEWPORT 
THISUNIT 
’TANK-WORLD) 

(GET. VALUE 
’CIRCLE. 11 

48 

’POSITION)))) 

)) 

METHOD (# [Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES])) 

(FIND.WEST 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT 
’WEST 

(PICTURE-AT-POSITION-IN- VIEWPORT ’TANK-WORLD 

(SUBTRACT-POSITION-FROM-POSITION (FIND-POSITION-IN- VIEWPORT 
THISUNIT 
’TANK-WORLD) 

(GET.VALUE 

’CIRCLE.2 

’POSITION)))) 

)) 

METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES])) 

(NORTH (NIL)) 

(NORTH.PATH NIL NIL ((ONE.OF CLEAR OBSTRUCTED EXPLORED)) NIL 
((CARDINALITY. MIN (1)) (CARDIN ALITY.MAX (1)))) 

(PREVIOU S . DIRECTION) 

(PREVIOUS.POSITION NIL NIL NIL NIL ((CARDIN ALITY.MIN (1)) (CARDINALITY. MAX (1)))) 
(SOUTH (NIL)) 

(SOUTH .PATH NIL NIL ((ONE.OF CLEAR OBSTRUCTED EXPLORED)) NIL 
((CARD IN ALITY.MIN (1)) (CARDIN ALITY.MAX (1)))) 

(WEST (NIL)) 

(WEST.PATH NIL NIL ((ONE.OF CLEAR OBSTRUCTED EXPLORED)) NIL 
((CARD IN ALITY.MIN (1)) (CARDIN ALITY.MAX (1)))) 

) 

0 ) 

(TWO.CHOICE.MOVE. AWAY. SOUTH 

("goodpasturer" "9-10-87 14:09:56" "goodpasturer” "12-3-87 10:34:14") 

NIL 

(AS V-DRI VER.RULES) 

NIL 

49 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM 

((IF (? VEHICLE IS IN CLASS VEHICLES) 

(THE DRIVER OF ? VEHICLE IS 7DRIVER) 

(THE RELATTVE.LOCATION.X OF 7DRIVER IS EAST.OF.GOAL) 

(CANT.FIND (THE WEST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
(((THE RELATIVE.LOCATION.Y OF 7DRIVER IS SOUTH.OF.GOAL) AND 
(CANT.FIND (THE NORTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR))) 
OR (THE RELATIVE.LOCATION.Y OF 7DRIVER IS AT.GOAL.Y)) 

(THE SOUTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR) 

THEN 

(LISP (UNITMSG 7 VEHICLE ’MOVE.SOUTH))))) 

(MAKE.AND.WORLD? (NIL)) 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

(RULE.TYPE (SAME.WORLD.ACTION)) 

)) 

(TWO.CHOICE.MOVE.AW AY .NORTH 

("goodpasturer" "9-10-87 14:09:56" "goodpasturer" "12-3-87 10:34:13") 

NIL 

(ASV-DRIVER.RULES) 

NIL 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM 

((IF (7 VEHICLE IS IN CLASS VEHICLES) 

(THE DRIVER OF 7 VEHICLE IS 7DRIVER) 

(THE RELATIVE .LOCATION.X OF 7DRIVER IS WEST.OF.GOAL) 

(CANT.FIND (THE EAST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
(((THE RELATIVE.LOCATION.Y OF 7DRIVER IS NORTH.OF.GOAL) AND 
(CANT.FIND (THE SOUTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR))) 
OR (THE RELATIVE.LOCATION.Y OF 7DRIVER IS AT.GOAL.Y)) 

(THE NORTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR) 

THEN 

(LISP (UNITMSG 7 VEHICLE ’MOVE.NORTH))))) 

(MAKE.AND. WORLD? (NIL)) 

50 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

(RULE.TYPE (SAME.WORLD.ACTION)) 

)) 

(TWO.CHOICE.MOVE. AWAY. WEST 

("goodpasturer" "9-10-87 14:09:56" "goodpasturer” "12-3-87 10:34:12") 

NIL 

(ASV-DRIVER.RULES) 

NIL 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM 

((IF (? VEHICLE IS IN CLASS VEHICLES) 

(THE DRIVER OF ? VEHICLE IS ? DRIVER) 

(((THE RELATIVE.LOCATION.X OF 7DRIVER IS WEST.OF.GOAL) AND 
(CANT.FIND (THE EAST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF ? VEHICLE) IS CLEAR))) 
OR (THE RELATIVE.LOCATION.X OF ? DRIVER IS AT.GOAL.X)) 

(THE RELATIVEHOCATION.Y OF 7DRIVER IS SOUTH.OF.GOAL) 

(CANT.FIND (THE NORTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF ? VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
(THE WEST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF ? VEHICLE) IS CLEAR) 

THEN 

(LISP (UNITMSG ? VEHICLE ’MOVE.WEST))))) 

(MAKE.AND.WORLD? (NIL)) 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

(RULE.TYPE (SAME.WORLD .ACTION)) 

)) 

(TWO.CHOICE.MOVE.AWAY.EAST 

("goodpasturer" "9-10-87 14:09:56” "goodpasturer" "12-3-87 10:34:12") 

NIL 

(AS V-DRIVER JOULES) 

NIL 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM 

((IF (? VEHICLE IS IN CLASS VEHICLES) 

(THE DRIVER OF ? VEHICLE IS 7DRIVER) 

51 

(((THE RELATIVE .LOCATION.X OF 7DRIVER IS EAST.OF.GOAL) AND 
(CANT.FTND (THE WEST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF ? VEHICLE) IS CLEAR))) 
OR (THE RELATIVE.LOCATION.X OF 7DRIVER IS AT.GOAL.X)) 

(THE RELATIVE .LOCATION. Y OF 7DRIVER IS NORTH.OF.GOAL) 

(CANT.FIND (THE SOUTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
(THE EAST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR) 

THEN 

(LISP (UNITMSG 7 VEHICLE ’MOVE.EAST))))) 

(MAKE.AND. WORLD? (NIL)) 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

(RULE.TYPE (SAME.WORLD.ACTION)) 

)) 

(BACK.TRACK 

("goodpasturer" "9-10-87 14:09:56" "goodpasturer" "12-3-87 10:34:11") 

NIL 

(ASV-DRIVER.RULES) 

NIL 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM 

((IF (7 VEHICLE IS IN CLASS VEHICLES) 

(THE DRIVER OF 7 VEHICLE IS 7DRIVER) 

(CANT.FIND (THE RELATIVE.LOCATION OF 7DRIVER IS AT.GOAL)) 
(CANT.FIND (THE WEST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
(CANT.FIND (THE NORTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
(CANT.FIND (THE SOUTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
(CANT.FIND (THE EAST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
THEN 

(LISP (UNITMSG 7 VEHICLE ’BACK.TRACK))))) 

(MAKE.AND.WORLD? (NIL)) 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

(RULE.TYPE (SAME.WORLD.ACTION)) 

)) 

(MOVE.NORTH.AWAY 

52 

("goodpasturer" "9-10-87 14:09:56" "goodpasturer" "12-3-87 10:34:09") 

NIL 

(ASV-DRIVER.RULES) 

NIL 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM 

((IF (? VEHICLE IS IN CLASS VEHICLES) 

(THE DRIVER OF ? VEHICLE IS ? DRIVER) 

(CANT.FIND (THE REL ATI VE.LOC ATION OF 7DRIVER IS AT.GOAL)) 
(CANT.FIND (THE WEST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF ? VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
(CANT.FIND (THE EAST PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF ? VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
(CANT.FIND (THE SOUTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF ? VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
(THE NORTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF ? VEHICLE) IS CLEAR) 

THEN 

(LISP (UNITMSG ? VEHICLE ’MOVE.NORTH))))) 

(MAKE.AND .WORLD? (NIL)) 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

(RULE .TYPE (SAME.WORLD .ACTION)) 

)) 

(MOVE.SOUTH.AWAY 

("goodpasturer" "9-10-87 14:09:56" "goodpasturer" "12-3-87 10:34:09") 

NIL 

(ASV-DRIVER.RULES) 

NIL 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM 

((IF (? VEHICLE IS IN CLASS VEHICLES) 

(THE DRIVER OF ? VEHICLE IS 7DRIVER) 

(CANT.FIND (THE RELATIVE.LOCATION OF 7DRIVER IS AT.GOAL)) 
(CANT.FIND (THE WEST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
(CANT.FIND (THE NORTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
(CANT.FIND (THE EAST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
(THE SOUTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR) 

THEN 

53 

(LISP (UNITMSG ? VEHICLE ’MOVE.SOUTH))))) 

(MAKE.AND.WORLD? (NIL)) 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

(RULE .TYPE (SAME.WORLD.ACTION)) 

)) 

(MOVE.WEST.AWAY 

("goodpasturer" "9-10-87 14:09:56" "goodpasturer” "12-3-87 10:34:08”) 

NIL 

(ASV-DRIVER.RULES) 

NIL 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM 

((IF (? VEHICLE IS IN CLASS VEHICLES) 

(THE DRIVER OF ? VEHICLE IS ? DRIVER) 

(CANT.FIND (THE RELATIVE.LOCATION OF 7DRIVER IS AT.GOAL)) 
(CANT.FIND (THE EAST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF ? VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
(CANT.FIND (THE NORTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF ? VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
(CANT.FIND (THE SOUTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF ? VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
(THE WEST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF ? VEHICLE) IS CLEAR) 

THEN 

(LISP (UNITMSG ? VEHICLE ’MOVE.WEST))))) 

(MAKE.AND.WORLD? (NIL)) 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

(RULE.TYPE (SAME.WORLD.ACTION)) 

)) 

(MO VE.EAST.AW AY 

("goodpasturer" ”9-10-87 14:09:56" "goodpasturer" "12-3-87 10:34:07") 

NIL 

(ASV-DRIVER.RULES) 

NIL 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM 

((IF (? VEHICLE IS IN CLASS VEHICLES) 

54 

(THE DRIVER OF ? VEHICLE IS 7DRIVER) 

(CANT.FIND (THE RELATIVE.LOCATION OF 7DRIVER IS AT.GOAL)) 

(CANT.FIND (THE WEST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
(CANT.FIND (THE NORTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 
(CANT.FIND (THE SOUTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)) 

(THE EAST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR) 

THEN 

(LISP (UNITMSG 7 VEHICLE ’MOVE.EAST))))) 

(MAKE. AND. WORLD? (NIL)) 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

(RULE.TYPE (SAME. WORLD. ACTION)) 

)) 

(MOVE.WEST.TO.GOAL 

("goodpasturcr" "9-10-87 14:09:56" "goodpasturer" "12-3-87 10:34:07") 

NIL 

(ASV-DRIVER.RULES) 

NIL 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM 

((IF (7 VEHICLE IS IN CLASS VEHICLES) 

(THE DRIVER OF 7 VEHICLE IS 7 DRIVER) 

(THE RELATIVE.LOCATION.X OF 7DRIVER IS EAST.OF.GOAL) 

((THE BEST.CHOICE OF DIRECTIONS IS EAST. WEST) OR 
((THE BEST.CHOICE OF DIRECTIONS IS NORTH.SOUTH) AND 
(((THE RELATIVE.LOCATION.Y OF 7DRIVER IS NORTH.OF.GOAL) AND 
(CANT.FIND (THE SOUTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR))) 
OR 

((THE RELATIVE.LOCATION.Y OF 7DRIVER IS SOUTH.OF.GOAL) AND 
(CANT.FIND (THE NORTH.PATH OF (THE NODEJLOC OF 7VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)))))) 
(THE WEST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR) 

THEN 

(LISP (UNITMSG 7 VEHICLE ’MOVE.WEST))))) 

(MAKE.AND.WORLD? (NIL)) 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

55 

(RULE. TYPE (SAME.WORLD.ACTION)) 

)) 

(MOVE.SOUTH.TO.GOAL 

("goodpasturer" "9-10-87 14:09:56" "goodpasturer" "12-3-87 10:34:06”) 

NIL 

(AS V -DRI VER.RULES) 

NIL 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM 

((IF (? VEHICLE IS IN CLASS VEHICLES) 

(THE DRIVER OF ? VEHICLE IS ? DRIVER) 

(THE RELATIVE.LOCATION.Y OF ? DRIVER IS NORTH.OF.GOAL) 

((THE BEST.CHOICE OF DIRECTIONS IS NORTH.SOUTH) OR 
((THE BEST.CHOICE OF DIRECTIONS IS EAST. WEST) AND 
(((THE RELATIVE.LOCATION.X OF 7DRIVER IS EAST.OF.GOAL) AND 
(CANT.FIND (THE WEST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF ? VEHICLE) IS CLEAR))) 
OR 

((THE RELATIVE.LOCATION.X OF 7DRIVER IS WEST.OF.GOAL) AND 
(CANT.FIND (THE EAST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)))))) 
(THE SOUTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR) 

THEN 

(LISP (UNITMSG 7 VEHICLE ’MOVE.SOUTH))))) 

(MAKE. AND .WORLD? (NIL)) 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

(RULE.TYPE (SAME.WORLD.ACTION)) 

)) 

(MOVE.NORTH.TO.GOAL 

("goodpasturer" ”9-10-87 14:09:56" "goodpasturer” "12-3-87 10:34:05") 

NIL 

(ASV-DRI VER.RULES) 

NIL 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM 

56 

((IF (? VEHICLE IS IN CLASS VEHICLES) 

(THE DRIVER OF? VEHICLE IS 7DRIVER) 

(THE RELATIVE.LOCATION.Y OF 7DRIVER IS SOUTH.OF.GOAL) 

((THE BEST.CHOICE OF DIRECTIONS IS NORTH.SOUTH) OR 
((THE BEST.CHOICE OF DIRECTIONS IS EAST. WEST) AND 
(((THE RELATIVE.LOCATION.X OF 7DRIVER IS EAST.OF.GOAL) AND 
(CANT.FIND (THE WEST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7VEHICLE) IS CLEAR))) 

OR 

((THE RELATIVE.LOCATION.X OF 7DRIVER IS WEST.OF.GOAL) AND 
(CANT.FIND (THE EAST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)))))) 
(THE NORTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7VEHICLE) IS CLEAR) 

THEN 

(LISP (UNITMSG 7 VEHICLE ’MOVE.NORTH))))) 

(MAKE.AND.WORLD? (NIL)) 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

(RULE.TYPE (SAME. WORLD .ACTION)) 

)) 

(MOVE.EAST.TO.GOAL 

("goodpasturer" "9-10-87 14:09:56" "goodpasturer" "12-3-87 10:34:05") 

NIL 

(ASV-DRIVER.RULES) 

NIL 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM 

((IF (7 VEHICLE IS DM CLASS VEHICLES) 

(THE DRIVER OF 7 VEHICLE IS 7 DRIVER) 

(THE REL ATI V E .LOCATION. X OF 7DRIVER IS WEST.OF.GOAL) 

((THE BEST.CHOICE OF DIRECTIONS IS EAST. WEST) OR 
((THE BEST.CHOICE OF DIRECTIONS IS NORTH.SOUTH) AND 
(((THE RELATIVE.LOCATION.Y OF 7 DRIVER IS NORTH.OF.GOAL) AND 
(CANT.FIND (THE SOUTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR))) 
OR 

((THE RELATIVE.LOCATION.Y OF 7DRIVER IS SOUTH.OF.GOAL) AND 
(CANT.FIND (THE NORTH.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF 7 VEHICLE) IS CLEAR)))))) 

57 

(THE EAST.PATH OF (THE NODE.LOC OF ? VEHICLE) IS CLEAR) 

THEN 

(LISP (UNITMSG ? VEHICLE ’MOVE.EAST))))) 

(MAKE.AND.WORLD? (NIL)) 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

(RULE.TYPE (SAME. WORLD. ACTION)) 

)) 

(DIRECTIONS 

("goodpasturer" ”9-10-87 14:09:42” "goodpasturer” ”11-12-87 13:31:48”) 

NIL 

((ENTITIES GENERICUNITS)) 

NIL 

0 

((BEST.CHOICE (NORTH.SOUTH) NIL ((ONE.OF EAST. WEST NORTH.SOUTH)) NIL 
((CARDINALITY. MIN (1)) (CARDIN ALITY.MAX (1)))) 

)) 

(KEEPICTURE. INSTANCES 

("goodpasturer" "9-10-87 13:52:38” "goodpasturer” "12-2-87 13:17:40") 

NIL 

((ENTITIES GENERICUNITS)) 

"A dummy unit to group all KEEpicture instances together in a KBgraph." 

0 

((DELETE- ALL-IMAGES! (AI3-DELETE- ALL-IMAGES) METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES])) 
(GRAPH. ALL.PICTURES ! (KP-GRAPH) METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES])) 
(KEEPICTURE.INSTANCES 

(#[Unit: BOX-STRING-DISCONNECT.COMMS-OF-TALK.5 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] 

#[Unit: INVISIBLE.PICTURE.il ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] 

#[Unit: VIEWPORT-DISCONNECT.COMMS-OF-TALK.5 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] 

#[Unif BOX-STRING-INITIALIZE-TERRAIN-OF-ASV-COMMANDER.4 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] 

#[Unit INVISIBLE.PICTURE.9 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] 

#[Unit: VIEWPORT-INITI ALIZE-TERR AIN-OF- AS V -COMMANDER.4 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] 

#[Unit BOX-STRING-START- WALKER-OF-ASV-COMMANDER.3 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] 

#[Unif INVISIBLE.PICTURE.8 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] 

58 

#LUnit: VIEWPORT-START- WALKER-0F-ASV-C0MMANDER.3 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] 

#[Unit BOX-STRING-INITIALIZE.COMMS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS.2 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] 

#[Unit: INVISIBLE.PICTURE.7 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] 

#[Unif VIEWPORT-INITIALIZE.COMMS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS.2 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] 

#[ Unit: BOX-STRING-LOAD.IRIS-FLAVORS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS.l ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] 

#[Unit: INVISIBLE.PICTURE.2 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] 

#[Unit: VIEWPORT-LOAD.IRIS-FLAVORS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS.l ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] 

#[Unif SOUTH.TANK ASV] #[Unit: NORTH.TANK ASV] #[Unit: WEST.TANK ASV] 

#[Unit: INVISIBLE.PICTURE. 10 ASV]) 

VARIABLE. VALUES) 

(OPEN- ALL-IMAGES! (AI3-OPEN-ALL-IMAGES) METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES])) 

(OPEN. ALL.PICTURES ! (OPEN-ALL-VIEWPORTS) METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES])) 

(VIE WPORT.STATUS.ON.KB LOAD NIL OVERRIDE. V ALUES 

((ONE.OF CREATE-WINDOWS ASK-TO-CREATE-WINDOWS DONT-CREATE-WINDOWS CREATE-CLOSED CRE 
ASK-TO-OPEN CREATE-OPEN)) 

(ASK-TO-CREATE-WINDOWS CREATE-SAME)) 

)) 

(NORTH.TANK 

("goodpasturer" "9-14-87 14:08:01" "goodpasturer” "12-3-87 10:29:01") 

NIL 

((BITMAPS KEEPICTURES)) 

NIL 

0 

((BACK.TRACK 
((LAMBDA (THISUN1T) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

(GET. V ALUE (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’PREVIOUS. POSITION) 

’POSITION) 

T 

NIL 

50) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’INVERT) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT 

59 

’NODE.LOC 

(GET. VALUE (GET.VALUE TfflSUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’PREVIOUS .POSITION))))) 

(BITMAP (NEWTANK.NORTH.TANK.BITMAP.3812)) 

(CONNECTING .LINES) 

(DEPENDENT.PICTURES) 

(DRIVER (#[Uniu ASV-DRIVER ASV])) 

(EAST.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

(HIGHLIGHTP (NIL)) 

(LOCAL.COMPACT.UNIT.SLOTNAMES (NIL)) 

(LOCATION-X ((AREF (GET.VALUE ’TANK1 ’POSITION) 1))) 

(LOCATION-Y ((AREF (GET.VALUE ’TANK1 ’POSITION) 2))) 

(MASK.BITMAP (NIL)) 

(MOVE.EAST 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

(GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’EAST) ’POSITION) 

T 

NIL 

50) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’GRAY) 

(PUT.VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’EAST) 

’PREVIOUS.POSITION 
(GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC)) 

(PUT.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’EAST))))) 
(MOVE.NORTH 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

(GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’NORTH) ’POSITION) 

T 

NIL 

50) 

(PUT.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’GRAY) 

(PUT.VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODELOC) ’NORTH) 

60 

’PREVIOUS. POSITION 

(GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’NORTH))))) 
(MOVE. SOUTH 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

(GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’SOUTH) ’POSITION) 

T 

NIL 

50) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’GRAY) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’SOUTH) 

’ PRE V IOUS .POS ITION 

(GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’SOUTH))))) 
(MOVE. WEST 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

(GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’WEST) ’POSITION) 

T 

NIL 

50) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’GRAY) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’WEST) 

’PREVIOUS.POSITION 

(GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’WEST))))) 
(NODE.LOC (CIRCLE.91)) 

(NORTH.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

(OPAQUEP (T)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(POSITION (#S (POS ITION :X 0.0 :Y -3.0))) 

(PREVIOUS.POSITION (#[Uniu CIRCLE.90 ’•'Kb-?*])) 

61 

(REGION (#S(REGION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 :WIDTH 22 :HEIGHT 22))) 

(REGION.OF.SUBPICTURES (#S(REGION :LEFT -1.0 :BOTTOM 0.0 :WIDTH 23.0 : HEIGHT 23.0))) 
(SOUTH.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

(SUBPICTURES (#[Unit SOUTH.TANK ASV])) 

(SUPERPICTURE (#[Unit: WEST.TANK ASV])) 

(TERRAIN (#[Unit: TERRAIN2 ASV])) 

(VIEWPORTS) 

(WEST.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

)) 

(SOUTH.TANK 

("goodpasturer” "9-14-87 14:20:59" "goodpasturer" "12-3-87 10:29:01”) 

NIL 

((BITMAPS KEEPICTURES)) 

NIL 

0 

((BACKTRACK 
((LAMBDA (THIS UNIT} 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

(GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’PREVIOUS .POSITION) 
’POSITION) 

T 

NIL 

50) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’INVERT) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT 
’NODE.LOC 

(GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’PREVIOUS .POSITION))))) 

(BITMAP (NEWTANK.SOUTH.TANK.BITMAP.3810)) 

(CONNECTING.LINES) 

(DEPENDENT.PICTURES) 

(DRIVER (#[ Unit: ASV-DRIVER ASV])) 

(EAST.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

(HIGHLIGHTP (NIL)) 

62 

(LOCAL.COMPACT.UNIT.SLOTNAMES (NIL)) 

(LOCATION-X ((AREF (GET.VALUE ’TANK1 ’POSITION) 1))) 

(LOCATION-Y ((AREF (GET.VALUE ’TANK1 ’POSITION) 2))) 

(MASK. BITMAP (NIL)) 

(MOVE.EAST 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

(GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’EAST) ’POSITION) 

T 

NIL 

50) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’GRAY) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’EAST) 

’PREVIOUS.POSITION 
(GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’EAST))))) 
(MOVE.NORTH 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

(GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’NORTH) ’POSITION) 

T 

NIL 

50) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’GRAY) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’NORTH) 

’PREVIOUS.POSITION 
(GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’NORTH))))) 
(MOVE.SOUTH 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

(GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’SOUTH) ’POSITION) 

63 

T 

NIL 

50) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’GRAY) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’SOUTH) 

’PREVIOUS.POSITION 

(GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’SOUTH))))) 
(MOVE. WEST 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

(GET.VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’WEST) ’POSITION) 

T 

NIL 

50) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’GRAY) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’WEST) 

’PREVIOUS.POSITION 
(GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’WEST))))) 
(NODE.LOC (CIRCLE.91)) 

(NORTH.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

(OPAQUEP (T)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(POSITION (#S(POSITION :X -1.0 :Y 1.0))) 

(PREVIOUS.POSITION (#[Unit: CIRCLE.90 *Kb-?*])) 

(REGION (#S(REGION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 :WIDTH 22 : HEIGHT 22))) 

(REGION.OF.SUBPICTURES (#S(REGION :LEFT 0 : BOTTOM 0 : WIDTH 22 : HEIGHT 22))) 
(SOUTH.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

(SUBPICTURES) 

(SUPERPICTURE (#[Unit: NORTH.TANK ASV])) 

(TERRAIN (#[Unit: TERRA IN2 ASV])) 

(VIEWPORTS) 

(WEST.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

64 

)) 

(WEST.TANK 

("goodpasturer" "9-14-87 13:44:03" "goodpasturer" "12-3-87 10:29:01") 

NIL 

((BITMAPS KEEPICTURES)) 

NIL 

0 

((BACK.TRACK 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

(GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’PREVIOUS .POSITION) 
’POSITION) 

T 

NIL 

50) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’INVERT) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT 
’NODE.LOC 

(GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’PREVIOUS .POSITION))))) 

(BITMAP (NEWTANK.WEST.TANK.BITMAP.3795)) 

(CONNECTING .LINES) 

(DEPENDENT.PICTURES) 

(DRIVER (#[Unit: ASV-DRIVER ASV])) 

(EAST.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

(HIGHLIGHTP (NIL)) 

(LOCAL.COMPACT.UNIT.SLOTNAMES (NIL)) 

(LOCATION-X ((AREF (GET. VALUE ’TANK1 ’POSITION) 1))) 

(LOCATION-Y ((AREF (GET. VALUE ’TANK1 ’POSITION) 2))) 

(MASK.BITMAP (NIL)) 

(MOVE.EAST 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

65 

(GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’EAST) ’POSITION) 

T 

NIL 

50 ) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’GRAY) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’EAST) 

’PREVIOUS.POSITION 

(GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’EAST))))) 
(MOVE.NORTH 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

(GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’NORTH) ’POSITION) 

T 

NIL 

50 ) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’GRAY) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’NORTH) 

’PREVIOUS.POSITION 

(GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC (GET. VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’NORTH))))) 
(MOVE.SOUTH 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

(GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’SOUTH) ’POSITION) 

T 

NIL 

50 ) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’GRAY) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’SOUTH) 

’PREVIOUS.POSITION 
(GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’SOUTH))))) 

66 

(MOVE. WEST 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

(GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’WEST) ’POSITION) 

T 

NIL 

50) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’GRAY) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’WEST) 

’PREVIOUS .POSITION 
(GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’WEST))))) 
(NODE.LOC (CIRCLE.91)) 

(NORTH.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

(OPAQUEP (T)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(POSITION (#S(POSITION :X 2.0 :Y -2.0))) 

(PREVIOUS .POSITION (#[Unit: CIRCLE.90 *Kb-?*])) 

(REGION (#S(REGION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 : WIDTH 22 : HEIGHT 22))) 

(REGION.OF.SUBPICTURES (#S(REGION :LEFT -1.0 .-BOTTOM -3.0 :WIDTH 23.0 : HEIGHT 25.0))) 
(SOUTH.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

(SUBPICTURES (#[Unit: NORTH.TANK ASV])) 

(SUPERPICTURE (#[Unit: ASV ASV])) 

(TERRAIN (#[Unit: TERRAIN2 ASV])) 

(VIEWPORTS) 

(WEST.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

)) 

(GOAL.LABEL 

("goodpasturer" "9-11-87 10:18:16" "goodpasturer" "12-3-87 10:29:00”) 

NIL 

((BITMAPS KEEPICTURES)) 

NIL 

0 

67 

((BITMAP (NEWTANK.GOAL.LABEL.BITMAP.3886)) 

(EAST.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

(HIGHLIGHTP (NIL)) 

(LABEL ("GOAL")) 

(LABEL.BITMAP (ASV.GOAL.LABEL.LABEL.BITMAP.3525)) 

(LABEL.FONT) 

(LABEL.POSITION) 

(LOCAL.COMPACT.UNIT.SLOTNAMES (NIL)) 

(MASK.BITMAP (NIL)) 

(NORTH.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

(OPAQUEP (NIL)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(POSITION (#S(POSITION :X 100 :Y 300))) 

(PREVIOUS.POSITION (#[Unit CIRCLE. 12 *Kb-?*])) 

(REGION (#S (REG ION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM -16 :WIDTH 40 : HEIGHT 21))) 
(REGION.OF.SUBPICTURES (#S(REGION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM -16 :WIDTH 40 : HEIGHT 21))) 
(SCALE.FACTOR.X) 

(SCALE.F ACTOR. Y) 

(SOUTH.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

(SUPERPICTURE (#[Unit: INVISIBLE.PICTURE.10 ASV])) 

(WEST.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

)) 

(INVISIBLE.PICTURE.10 
("goodpasturer” ”9-10-87 13:52:39”) 

NIL 

((INVISIBLE.PICTURES KEEPICTURES)) 

NIL 

0 

((OPENP (OPEN)) 

(POSITION (#S (POSITION :X 0 :Y 0))) 

(REGION (NIL)) 

(REGION.OF.SUBPICTURES (#S(REGION :LEFT 0 : BOTTOM 284 .-WIDTH 140 : HEIGHT 188))) 
(SUBPICTURES (#[UniC ASV ASV] #[Unit: GOAL.LABEL ASV])) 

(VIEWPORTS) 

68 

)) 

(AS V- DRIVER 

("goodpasturer" "9-11-87 10:16:09" "goodpasturer" "11-12-87 13:38:41") 

NIL 

(DRIVERS) 

NIL 

0 

((RELATIVE.LOCATION (NOT.AT.GOAL)) 

(RELAT1VE.LOCATION.X (AT.GOAL.X)) 

(RELATIVE.LOCATION. Y (AT.GOAL.Y)) 

(RELATIVE.POSITION (AT.GOAL)) 

(RULE. SET (#[Unic AS V-DRIVER. RULES ASV])) 

(VEHICLE (#[Unit: ASV ASV])) 

(VISION 

((LAMBDA (THISUNIT &AUX VEH TER GOALLOC VEHLOC) 

(SETQ VEH (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’VEHICLE)) 

(SETQ TER (GET. VALUE VEH ’TERRAIN)) 

(SETQ GOALLOC 

(LIST (EVAL (GET. VALUE TER ’GOAL.LOCATION-X)) 

(EVAL (GET. VALUE TER ’GOAL.LOCATION-Y)))) 

(SETQ VEHLOC (LIST (EVAL (GET. VALUE VEH ’LOCATION-X)) (EVAL (GET. VALUE VEH ’LOCATION- Y)))) 
(COND ((> (ABS (- (CAR VEHLOC) (CAR GOALLOC))) (ABS (- (CADR VEHLOC) (CADR GOALLOC)))) 

(PUT. VALUE ’DIRECTIONS ’BEST.CHOICE ’EAST.WEST)) 

(T (PUT. VALUE ’DIRECTIONS ’BEST.CHOICE ’NORTH.SOUTH))) 

(COND ((< (CAR VEHLOC) (CAR GOALLOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’RELATIVE.LOCATION.X ’WEST.OF.GOAL)) 

((> (CAR VEHLOC) (CAR GOALLOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’RELATIVE.LOCATION.X ’EAST.OF.GOAL)) 

(T (PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’RELATIVE.LOCATION.X ’AT.GOAL.X))) 

(COND ((> (CADR VEHLOC) (CADR GOALLOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’RELATIVE.LOCATION.Y ’NORTH.OF.GOAL)) 

((< (CADR VEHLOC) (CADR GOALLOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’RELATIVE.LOCATION.Y ’SOUTH.OF.GOAL)) 

(T (PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’RELATIVE.LOCATION.Y ’AT.GOAL.Y))) 

69 

(COND ((AND (EQUAL (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’ RELATIVE .LOCATION.Y) ’AT.GOAL.Y) 
(EQUAL (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’RELATIVE.LOCATION.X) ’AT.GOAL.X)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’RELATIVE.LOCATION ’AT .GOAL)) 

(T (PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’RELATIVE.LOCATION ’NOT.AT.GOAL))) 

(LET ((WEST.ST ATUS (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’WEST)) 
(EAST.STATUS (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’EAST)) 
(NORTH.STATUS (GET.VALUE (GET. VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’NORTH)) 
(SOUTH.STATUS (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’SOUTH))) 

(COND ((EQUAL WEST.STATUS NIL) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE ’ASV ’NODE.LOC) ’WEST.PATH ’OBSTRUCTED)) 
((EQUAL (GET.VALUE WEST.STATUS ’HIGHLIGHTP) NIL) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’WEST.PATH ’CLEAR)) 

((EQUAL (GET.VALUE WEST.STATUS ’HIGHLIGHTP) ’GRAY) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’WEST.PATH ’EXPLORED)) 

(T (PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’WEST.PATH ’OBSTRUCTED))) 
(COND ((EQUAL EAST.STATUS NIL) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’EAST.PATH ’OBSTRUCTED)) 
((EQUAL (GET.VALUE EAST.STATUS ’HIGHLIGHTP) NIL) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’EAST.PATH ’CLEAR)) 

((EQUAL (GET.VALUE EAST.STATUS ’HIGHLIGHTP) ’GRAY) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’EAST.PATH ’EXPLORED)) 

(T (PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’EAST.PATH ’OBSTRUCTED))) 
(COND ((EQUAL NORTH.STATUS NIL) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’NORTH.PATH ’OBSTRUCTED)) 
((EQUAL (GET.VALUE NORTH.STATUS ’HIGHLIGHTP) NIL) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’NORTH.PATH ’CLEAR)) 

((EQUAL (GET.VALUE NORTH.STATUS ’HIGHLIGHTP) ’GRAY) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’NORTH.PATH ’EXPLORED)) 

(T (PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’NORTH.PATH ’OBSTRUCTED))) 
(COND ((EQUAL SOUTH.STATUS NIL) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’SOUTH.PATH ’OBSTRUCTED)) 
((EQUAL (GET.VALUE SOUTH.STATUS ’HIGHLIGHTP) NIL) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’SOUTH.PATH ’CLEAR)) 

((EQUAL (GET.VALUE SOUTH.STATUS ’HIGHLIGHTP) ’GRAY) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’SOUTH.PATH ’EXPLORED)) 

70 

(T (PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE VEH ’NODE.LOC) ’SOUTH.PATH ’OBSTRUCTED))))))) 

)) 

(ASV 

("goodpasturer" "9-11-87 10:16:09” "goodpasiurer" ”12-3-87 10:29:06”) 

NIL 

((BITMAPS KEEPICTURES) VEHICLES) 

NIL 

0 

((BACK.TRACK 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(SETQ BACKTRACK T) 

(LET ((DIRECTION (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’PREVIOUS .DIRECTION))) 
(CASE DIRECTION 

(WEST (UNITMSG THISUNIT ’MOVE. WEST)) 

(EAST (UNITMSG THISUNIT ’MOVE.EAST)) 

(SOUTH (UNITMSG THISUNIT ’MOVE.SOUTH)) 

(NORTH (UNITMSG THISUNIT ’MOVE.NORTH)))) 

(SETQ BACKTRACK NIL))) 

METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES]) NIL ((CARDIN ALITY.MIN (1)) (CARDIN ALITY.MAX (1)))) 
(BITMAP (NEWTANK.TANK1 .BITMAP.3799)) 

(DRIVER (#[Unit: ASV-DRIVER ASV])) 

(EAST.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

(HIGHLIGHTP (NIL)) 

(LABEL) 

(LABEL.BITMAP) 

(LABEL.FONT) 

(LABEL.POSITION) 

(LOCAL.COMPACT.UNIT.SLOTNAMES (NIL)) 

(LOCATION-X ((AREF (GET. VALUE ’ASV ’POSITION) 0))) 

(LOCATION-Y ((AREF (GET. VALUE ’ASV ’POSITION) 1))) 

(MASK.BITMAP (NIL)) 

(MOVE.EAST 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(UNITMSG ’TALK ’STOP) 

71 

(UN1TMSG TALK ’ACCELERATE-X) 

(UNITMSG THIS UNIT ’CLOSE! NIL T) 

(UN1TMSG THISUNIT ’OPEN! 1 T) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT ’REDISPLAY!) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

(GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’EAST) ’POSITION) 

T 

NIL 

50) 

(COND (BACKTRACK (PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’INVERT)) 
(T (PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’GRAY) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’EAST) 
’PREVIOUS.POSITION 
(GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOQ ’EAST) 

'PREVIOUS. DIRECTION 
’WEST))) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC (GET. VALUE (GET .VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’EAST)))) 
METHOD (# [Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES])) 

(MOVE.NORTH 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(UNITMSG ’TALK ’STOP) 

(UNITMSG ’TALK ’ACCELERATE-Y) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT ’CLOSE! NIL T) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT ’OPEN! 2 T) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT ’REDISPLAY!) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

(GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’NORTH) ’POSITION) 

T 

NIL 

50) 

(COND (BACKTRACK (PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’INVERT)) 
(T (PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’GRAY) 

72 

(PUT. VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’NORTH) 
’PREVIOUS.POSITION 
(GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’NORTH) 
’PREVIOUS.DIRECTION 
’SOUTH))) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’NORTH)))) 
METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES])) 

(MOVE.SOUTH 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(UNITMSG ’TALK ’STOP) 

(UNITMSG ’TALK ’DECELERATE- Y) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT ’CLOSE! NIL T) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT ’OPEN! 3 T) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT ’REDISPLAY!) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

(GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’SOUTH) ’POSITION) 

T 

NIL 

50) 

(COND (BACKTRACK (PUT.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’INVERT)) 
(T (PUT.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’GRAY) 

(PUT.VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’SOUTH) 

’PREVIOUS .POSITION 
(GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC)) 

(PUT.VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’SOUTH) 
’PREVIOUS.DIRECTION 
’NORTH))) 

(PUT.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’SOUTH)))) 
METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES])) 

(MOVE.WEST 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(UNITMSG ’TALK ’STOP) 

(UNITMSG ’TALK ’DECELERATE-X) 

73 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT ’CLOSE.SUBPICTURES!) 

(UNITMSG THISUNIT 
’MOVE! 

(GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’WEST) ’POSITION) 

T 

NIL 

50) 

(COND (BACKTRACK (PUT.VALUE (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’INVERT)) 
(T (PUT.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’HIGHLIGHTP ’GRAY) 

(PUT.VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’WEST) 
’PREVIOUS.POSITION 
(GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC)) 

(PUT.VALUE (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’WEST) 

’PREVIOUS . DIRECTION 
’EAST))) 

(PUT.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC (GET.VALUE (GET.VALUE THISUNIT ’NODE.LOC) ’WEST)))) 
METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES])) 

(NODE.LOC (CIRCLE.91) NIL NIL NIL ((CARDIN ALITY.MIN (0)) (CARDIN ALITY.MAX (100)))) 
(NORTH.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

(OPAQUEP (NIL)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(POSITION (#S(POSITION :X 0 :Y 450))) 

(PREVIOUS .POSITION (#[Unit: CIRCLE.90 *Kb-?*])) 

(REGION (#S(REGION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 : WIDTH 22 : HEIGHT 22))) 

(REGION.OF.SUBPICTURES (#S(REGION :LEFT 0.0 :BOTTOM -5.0 :WIDTH 24.0 : HEIGHT 27.0))) 
(SCALE.FACTOR.X) 

(SCALE.FACTOR.Y) 

(SOUTH.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

(SUBPICTURES (#[Unit: WEST.TANK ASV])) 

(SUPERPICTURE (#[Unit: INVISIBLE.PICTURE.10 ASV])) 

(TERRAIN (#[Unit: TERRAIN2 ASV])) 

(WEST.PATH (OBSTRUCTED)) 

)) 

(ASV-DRIVER.RULES 

74 

("goodpasturer" ”9-10-87 14:09:56" "GOODPASTURER" ”11-12-87 10:07:33") 

(DRIVING .RULES) 

((CLASSES GENERICUNITS)) 

NIL 

((ASSERTION) 

(EXTERN AL.FORM) 

(PREMISE) 

) 

((EXTERN AL.FORM (NIL)) 

)) 

(TERRAIN2 

("goodpasturer” "9-11-87 10:16:09" "goodpasturer" "11-12-87 13:38:41") 

(TERRAIN.EXAMPLES) 

((CLASSES GENERICUNITS)) 

NIL 

0 

((GOAL (CIRCLE.63)) 

(GOAL.LOCATION-X ((AREF (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE ’TERRAIN2 ’GOAL) ’POSITION) 0))) 
(GOAL.LOCATION-Y ((AREF (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE ’TERRAIN2 ’GOAL) ’POSITION) 1))) 

)) 

(FIND.WEST 

("goodpasturer" "9-10-87 13:50:11” "goodpasturer" ”12-3-87 10:34:15") 

NIL 

(INIT.DIRECTION S ) 

NIL 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM ((IF (7CIRCLE IS IN CIRCLES) THEN (LISP (UNITMSG 7CIRCLE ’FIND.WEST))))) 
(MAKE. AND. WORLD? (NIL)) 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

(RULE.TYPE (SAME. WORLD. ACTION)) 

)) 

(FIND .NORTH 

75 

("goodpasturer" "9-10-87 13:50:11” "goodpasturer" "12-3-87 10:34:15") 

NIL 

(INIT.DIRECTIONS) 

NIL 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM ((IF (7CIRCLE IS IN CIRCLES) THEN (LISP (UNITMSG 7CIRCLE ’FIND .NORTH))))) 
(MAKE. AND. WORLD? (NIL)) 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

(RULE.TYPE (SAME.WORLD.ACTION)) 

)) 

(FIND. SOUTH 

("goodpasturer" ”9-10-87 13:50:11" "goodpasturer" "12-3-87 10:34:14”) 

NIL 

(INIT.DIRECTIONS) 

NIL 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM ((IF (7CERCLE IS IN CIRCLES) THEN (LISP (UNITMSG 7CIRCLE ’FIND.SOUTH))))) 
(MAKE.AND.WORLD? (NIL)) 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

(RULE.TYPE (SAME.WORLD.ACTION)) 

)) 

(FIND .EAST 

("goodpasturer" "9-10-87 13:50:11" "goodpasturer" ”12-3-87 10:34:14") 

NIL 

(INIT.DIRECTIONS) 

NIL 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM ((IF (7CIRCLE IS IN CIRCLES) THEN (LISP (UNITMSG 7CIRCLE ’FIND .EAST))))) 
(MAKE.AND.WORLD? (NIL)) 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

(RULE.TYPE (SAME.WORLD.ACTION)) 

)) 

76 

(INIT.DIRECTIONS 

("goodpasturer" "9-10-87 13:50:11" "goodpasturer" "9-22-87 9:35:23") 

(IN1T.WORLD.RULES) 

((CLASSES GENERICUNITS)) 

NIL 

((ASSERTION) 

(EXTERN AL.FORM) 

(PREMISE) 

) 

0 ) 

(INIT.NODES 

("goodpasturer" "9-10-87 13:50:11" "goodpasturer" "12-3-87 10:34:15") 

NIL 

(INIT.WORLD.RULES) 

NIL 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM ((IF (7CIRCLE IS IN CIRCLES) THEN (LISP (ADD.PARENT 7CIRCLE ’NODES ’MEMBER T))) 

) 

(MAKE. AND. WORLD? (NIL)) 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

(RULE .TYPE (SAME. WORLD. ACTION)) 

)) 

(INIT.WORLD.RULES 

("goodpasturer" ”9-10-87 13:50:11” "goodpasturer" "9-10-87 12:50:13") 

((RULES RULES YSTEM3)) 

((RULE.CLASSES RULES YSTEM3)) 

NIL 

((ASSERTION) 

(EXTERN AL.FORM) 

(PREMISE) 

(STEP.BY (BY.PREMISE)) 

) 

0 ) 

77 

(TERR AIN 1 

("goodpasturer" "9-11-87 10:16:09" "goodpasturer" "9-11-87 9:16:10") 

NIL 

(TERRAIN.EXAMPLES) 

NIL 

0 

((GO ALLOCATION (50) NIL (#[Unfc INTEGER KEEDATATYPES]) NIL 
((CARDINALITY. MIN (1)) (CARDIN ALITY.MAX (1)))) 

(GOAL .LOC ATION-X (0)) 

(GOAL.LOCATION-Y (50)) 

(SIZE NIL NIL NIL NIL ((CARDIN ALITY.MIN (1)) (CARDIN ALITY.MAX (1)))) 

(TYPE (FLAT)) 

)) 

(DRIVING.RULES 

("goodpasturer" "9-10-87 14:09:56" "goodpasturer" "9-10-87 13:09:58") 

((RULES RULES YSTEM3)) 

((RULE.CLASSES RULES YSTEM3)) 

NIL 

((ASSERTION) 

(EXTERN AL.FORM) 

(PREMISE) 

(STEP.BY (BY.PREMISE)) 

) 

0 ) 

(TERRAIN.EXAMPLES 

("goodpasturer" ”9-11-87 10:16:09" "goodpasturer" "9-11-87 9:16:09") 

(ELEMENTS) 

((CLASSES GENERICUNITS)) 

NIL 

((GOAL.LOCATION-X NIL OVERRIDE. VALUES NIL NIL ((CARDIN ALITY.MIN (0)) (CARDIN ALITY.MAX 
(GOAL.LOCATION-Y NIL OVERRIDE.VALUES NIL NIL ((CARDIN ALITY.MIN (0)) (CARDINALITY. MAX 
(SIZE NIL NIL (#[Unit INTEGER KEEDATATYPES]) NIL 
((CARDIN ALITY.MIN (0)) (CARDIN ALITY.MAX (100)))) 

78 

(TYPE NIL NIL ((ONE.OF FLAT ROLLING RUGGED)) NIL ((CARDIN ALITY.MIN (1)) (CARDIN ALITY.MAX (1))) 

) 

0 ) 

(DRIVERS 

("goodpasturer" ”9-11-87 10:16:09" "goodpasturer" "9-22-87 8:59:40") 

(ELEMENTS) 

((CLASSES GENERICUNITS)) 

NIL 

((RELATIVE.LOCATION NIL NIL ((ONE.OF NOT.AT.GOAL AT.GOAL)) NIL 
((CARD IN ALITY.MIN (1)) (CARDIN ALITY.MAX (1)))) 

(RELATIVE.LOCATION.X NIL OVERRIDE. V ALUES ((ONE.OF EAST.OF.GOAL WEST.OF.GOAL AT.GOAL.X)) N 
((CARDIN ALITY.MIN (1)) (CARDINALITY.MAX (1)))) 

(RELATIVE.LOCATION.Y NIL OVERRIDE.V ALUES ((ONE.OF NORTH.OF.GOAL SOUTH.OF.GOAL AT.GOAL. Y 
((CARDIN ALITY.MIN (1)) (CARDINALITY.MAX (1)))) 

(RULE.SET NIL NIL (#[Unit: RULE.CLASSES RULES YSTEM3])) 

(SEEK.GOAL ((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) (ASSERT NIL ’DRIVING .RULES))) METHOD 
(#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES])) 

(VEHICLE NIL NIL (#[Unit: VEHICLES ASV]) NIL ((CARDIN ALITY.MIN (1)) (CARDINALITY.MAX (1)))) 
(VISION 

((LAMBDA (THISUNIT &AUX VEH TER GOALLOC VEHLOC) 

(SETQ VEH (GET. VALUE THISUNIT ’VEHICLE)) 

(SETQ TER (GET. VALUE VEH ’TERRAIN)) 

(SETQ GOALLOC (LIST (GET. VALUE TER ’GOAL.LOCATION-X) (GET. VALUE TER ’GOAL.LOCATION-Y))) 
(SETQ VEHLOC (LIST (GET. VALUE VEH ’LOCATION-X) (GET.VALUE VEH ’LOCATION- Y))) 

(COND ((< (CAR VEHLOC) (CAR GOALLOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’RELATIVE.LOCATION.X ’WEST.OF.GOAL)) 

((> (CAR VEHLOC) (CAR GOALLOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’RELATIVE.LOCATION.X ’EAST.OF.GOAL)) 

((> (CADR VEHLOC) (CADR GOALLOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’RELATIVE.LOCATION.Y ’NORTH.OF.GOAL)) 

((< (CADR VEHLOC) (CADR GOALLOC)) 

(PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’RELATIVE.LOCATION.Y ’SOUTH.OF.GOAL)) 

(T (PUT. VALUE THISUNIT ’RELATIVE.LOCATION ’AT.GOAL))))) 

METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES])) 

79 

) 

0) 

(ELEMENTS 

("goodpasturer" "9-11-87 10:16:09" "goodpasturer” ”9-11-87 9:16:09”) 

NIL 

((CLASSES GENERICUN1TS)) 

NIL 

0 

0 ) 

(VEHICLES 

("goodpasturer” "9-11-87 10:16:09” "goodpasturer" "9-11-87 9:16:09") 

(ELEMENTS) 

((CLASSES GENERICUNITS)) 

NIL 

((DRIVER NIL NIL (#[Unit DRIVERS ASV]) NIL ((CARDIN ALITY.MAX (1)) (CARDINALITY. MIN (1)))) 
(LOCATION-X NIL OVERRIDE. V ALUES NIL NIL ((CARDINALITY. MIN (0)) (CARDIN ALITY.MAX (100)) 
(LOCATION-Y NIL OVERRIDE.V ALUES NIL NIL ((CARDIN ALITY.MIN (0)) (CARDINALITY. MAX (100)) 
(TERRAIN NIL NIL (#[Uniu TERRAIN.EXAMPLES ASV]) NIL 
((CARD IN ALITY.MIN (1)) (CARDIN ALITY.MAX (1)))) 

) 

0 ) 

(COMMANDERS 

("goodpasturer" "9-11-87 10:20:50" "goodpasturer" "9-11-87 9:20:50”) 

NIL 

((CLASSES GENERICUNITS)) 

NIL 

0 

0 ) 

(IRIS.COMMS 

("goodpasturer" "12-2-87 13:00:35" "goodpasturer” "12-2-87 13:01:31”) 

NIL 

80 

((CLASSES GENERICUN1TS)) 

NIL 

0 

0 ) 

(BUILD.TERRAIN .MODEL 

("goodpasturer" "9-11-87 10:19:36" "goodpasturer" "12-2-87 13:02:59”) 

((ENTITIES GENERICUNITS)) 

((CLASSES GENERICUNITS)) 

NIL 

((INIT.NODES 

(LAMBDA (THISUNIT &AUX X Y) 

(DO ((Y 0 (+ Y 50))) 

((= Y 500) NIL) 

(DO ((X 0 (+ X 50))) 

((= X 500) NIL) 

(UNITMSG ’CIRCLES 

’CREATE.INSTANCE! 

’NEWTANK 

NIL 

’INVISIBLE.PICTURE. 1 0 
(LIST X Y) 

NIL 

10 

1 )))) 

METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES])) 

(INIT.VIEWPORT 

(LAMBDA NIL (UNITMSG ’VIEWPORTS ’CREATE.INSTANCE! NIL ’TANK-WORLD ’(50 50 500 500))) METHOD 
(#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES])) 

) 

0 ) 

(ASV.TERRAIN.RULES 

("goodpasturer" "9-11-87 10:20:00" "goodpasturer" "12-3-87 10:34:04”) 

NIL 

81 

(SET.UP.TERRAIN.RULES) 

NIL 

0 

((EXTERN AL.FORM 

((IF (7CIRCLE IS IN CLASS NODES) 

(THE HIGHLIGHTP OF 7CIRCLE IS GRAY) 

THEN 

(LISP (PUT. VALUE 7CIRCLE ’HIGHLIGHTP ’NIL))))) 

(MAKE. AND. WORLD? (NIL)) 

(PARSE.ERRORS) 

(RULE.TYPE (SAME. WORLD. ACTION)) 

)) 

(SET.UP.TERRAIN.RULES 

("goodpasturer" "9-11-87 10:20:00” "goodpasturer" "12-2-87 13:04:16") 
((RULES RULES YSTEM3)) 

((RULE.CLASSES RULES YSTEM3)) 

NIL 

((ASSERTION) 

(EXTERN AL.FORM) 

(PREMISE) 

) 

0) 

( AB S TR ACT.UNITDEF.FORM AT. 1 (COMPACT.UNIT) 

VIE WPORT-LOAD.IRIS -FLA VORS -OF-INITI ALIZE.COMMS. 1 

0 

((AI3-SLOT-VIEWPORTS ACTIVEIMAGES3)) 

0 

( 

(TITLE.FONT (*MEDIUM-BOLD-FONT*)) 

(BORDERS (8)) 

(IMAGE-CLASS (#[Unit: METHOD-ACTUATORS ACTIVEIMAGES3])) 
(SCROLL.ON.P (NIL)) 

(MOUSELEFTFN! (METHOD-ACTUATOR)) 

82 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(LISP.WINDOW.REGION (#S(REGION :LEFT 178 :BOTTOM 688 :WIDTH 250 : HEIGHT 60))) 
(ATTACHED-OBJECTS (#[Slot: LOAD.IRIS-FLAVORS INITIALIZE.COMMS ASV OWN])) 

(LISP. WINDOW (ASV.VIEWPORT-LOAD.IRIS-FLAVORS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS.1.WINDOW.41 14)) 
(MAPPING ((0 0 1 1))) 

(TITLE ("Initialize.Comms’s Load.Iris-Flavors")) 

(VIEWED.PICTURE (#[Unit: INVIS IBLE.PICTURE.2 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)])) 

(CACHED.PICTURE.REGIONS 

((#[Unit: BOX-STRING-LOAD.IRIS-FLAVORS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS.l ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] :OTHER 
. #S(REGION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 : WIDTH 234 : HEIGHT 32)))) 

(ACTUATOR (# [Unit: BOX-STRING-LOAD.IRIS-FLAVORS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS.l ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)]); 
(AVPUT (METHOD- ACTUATOR-RESPONSE)) 

)) 

(ABSTRACT.UNITDEF.FORMAT.l (COMPACT.UNIT) 
BOX-STRING-LOAD.IRIS-FLAVORS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS.l 
0 

((AI3-BOX-STRINGS ACTIVEIMAGES3)) 

0 

( 

(BORDERS (0)) 

(STRINGS (("ASV>INITIALIZE.COMMS::LOAD.IRIS-FLAVORS!method"))) 

(WRAPP (NIL)) 

(WIDTH (234)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(SUPERPICTURE (#[UniU INVISIBLE.PICTURE.2 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)])) 

(JUSTIFICATION.H (CENTER)) 

(JUSTIFICATION. V (CENTER)) 

(FONT (♦MEDIUM-FONT*)) 

(REGION.OF.SUBPICTURES (#S(REGION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 : WIDTH 234 : HEIGHT 32))) 

(REGION (#S(REGION :LEFT 0 : BOTTOM 0 :WIDTH 234 : HEIGHT 32))) 

(HEIGHT (32)) 

(OPAQUEP (T)) 

(POSITION (#S(POSITION :X 0 :Y 0))) 

)) 

(ABSTRACT.UNITDEFJORMAT.l (COMPACT.UNIT) 

83 

INVISIBLE.PICTURE.2 

0 

((INVISIBLE.PICTURES KEEPICTURES)) 

0 

( 

(VIEWPORTS (#[Unit: VIEWPORT-LOAD.IRIS-FLAVORS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS.l ASV (COMPACT.UN 
(POSITION (#S(POSITION :X 0 :Y 0))) 

(REGION (NIL)) 

(REGION.OF.SUBPICTURES (#S(REGION -.LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 : WIDTH 210 : HEIGHT 19))) 
(SUBPICTURES (#[Unit: BOX-STRING-LOAD.IRIS-FLAVORS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS.l ASV (COMPACT 
(MOUSERIGHTFN! (KPOBJECT-MOUSEANYFN)) 

(MOUSELEFTFN! (KPOBJECT-MOUSEANYFN)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(MOUSEMIDDLEFN! (PICTURE-MOVE-MOUSEFN)) 

)) 

(INITIALIZE.COMMS 

("GOODPASTURER" "10-29-87 9:03:07" "goodpasturer" ”12-2-87 13:18:06") 

NIL 

(IRIS.COMMS (CLASSES GENERICUNITS)) 

NIL 

0 

((INITIALIZE.COMMS ((LAMBDA (THISUNITT) (START-CON))) METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATAT 
((ACTIVEIMAGES3 (#[Unit: VIEWPORT-INITIALIZE.COMMS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS.2 ASV (COMPACT. 

. UNIQUE. VALUES))) 

(LOAD.IRIS-FLAVORS ((LAMBDA (THISUNITT) (LOAD ’IRIS2-FLAVOR.LISP))) METHOD 
(#[ Unit: METHOD KEEDAT ATYPESj) NIL 

((ACTIVEIMAGES3 (#[Unit: VIEWPORT-LOAD.IRIS-FLAVORS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS.l ASV (COMPACT. 
. UNIQUE. VALUES))) 

)) 

( ABSTRACT. UNITDEF.FORMAT. 1 (COMPACT.UNIT) 
VIEWPORT-INITIALIZE.COMMS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS.2 
0 

((AI3-SLOT-VIEWPORTS ACTIVEIMAGES3)) 

0 

84 

( 

(TITLE.FONT (* MEDIUM-BOLD-FONT*)) 

(BORDERS (8)) 

(IMAGE-CLASS (#[Unit: METHOD-ACTUATORS ACTIVEIMAGES3])) 

(SCROLL.ON.P (NIL)) 

(MOUSELEFTFN! (METHOD-ACTUATOR)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(LISP.WINDOW.REGION (#S(REGION :LEFT 178 :BOTTOM 615 :WIDTH 250 : HEIGHT 60))) 
(ATTACHED-OBJECTS (#[Slot: INITIALIZE.COMMS INITIALIZE.COMMS ASV OWN1)) 

(LISP. WINDOW (ASV.VIEWPORT-INITIALIZE.COMMS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS.2.WINDOW.4115)) 
(MAPPING ((0 0 1 1))) 

(TITLE ("Initialize.Comms’s Initialize.Comms")) 

(VIEWED.PICTURE (#[Unit: INVISIBLE.PICTURE.7 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)])) 

(CACHED.PICTURE.REGIONS 

((#[Unit: BOX-STRING-INITIAL IZE.COMMS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS.2 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] : OTHER 
. #S(REGION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 :WIDTH 234 : HEIGHT 32)))) 

(ACTUATOR (#[Unit: BOX-STRING-INITIALIZE.COMMS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS.2 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)])) 
(AVPUT (METHOD-ACTUATOR-RESPONSE)) 

)) 

( ABSTRACT. UNITDEF.FORMAT.1 (COMPACT.UNIT) 
BOX-STRING-INITIALIZE.COMMS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS.2 
0 

((AI3-BOX-STRINGS ACTIVEIMAGES3)) 

0 

( 

(BORDERS (0)) 

(STRINGS ((" AS V>INITI ALIZE.COMMS : : INITIALIZE.COMMS ! method"))) 

(WRAPP (NIL)) 

(WIDTH (234)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(SUPERPICTURE (#[Unit: INVISIBLE.PICTURE.7 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)])) 

(JUSTIFICATION.H (CENTER)) 

(JUSTIFICATIONS (CENTER)) 

(FONT (* MEDIUM-FONT*)) 

(REGION.OF.SUBPICTURES (#S(REGION .-LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 :WIDTH 234 : HEIGHT 32))) 

85 

(HIGHLIGHT? (NIL)) 

(REGION (#S (REGION :LEFT0 :BOTTOM 0 :WIDTH 234 : HEIGHT 32))) 

(HEIGHT (32)) 

(OPAQUEP (T)) 

(POSITION (#S(POSITION :X 0 :Y 0))) 

)) 

( ABSTRACT. UNITDEF.FORMAT. 1 (COMPACT.UNIT) 

INVISIBLE.PICTURE.7 

0 

((INVISIBLE.PICTURES KEEPICTURES)) 

0 

( 

(VIEWPORTS (#[Unit: VIEWPORT-INITIALIZE.COMMS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS.2 ASV (COMPACT.UNT 
(POSITION (#S(POSITION :X 0 :Y 0))) 

(REGION (NIL)) 

(REGION.OF.SUBPICTURES (#S(REGION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 :WIDTH 209 : HEIGHT 23))) 
(SUBPICTURES (#[Unit: BOX-STRING-INI TIALIZE.COMMS-OF-INITIALIZE.COMMS. 2 ASV (COMPACT. 
(MOUSERIGHTFN! (KPOBJECT-MOUSEANYFN)) 

(MOUSELEFTFN! (KPOBJECT-MOUSEANYFN)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(MOUSEMIDDLEFN! (PICTURE-MOVE-MOUSEFN)) 

)) 

( ABSTRACT. UNITDEF.FORMAT.1 (COMPACT.UNIT) 

VIEWPORT-START- WALKER-OF-ASV-COMMANDER.3 

0 

((AI3-SLOT- VIEWPORTS ACTIVEIMAGES3)) 

0 

( 

(TTTLE.FONT (♦MEDIUM-BOLD-FONT*)) 

(BORDERS (8)) 

(IMAGE-CLASS (#[Unit: METHOD-ACTUATORS ACTIVEIMAGES3])) 

(SCROLL.ON.P (NIL)) 

(MOUSELEFTFN! (METHOD -ACTUATOR)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(LISP.WINDOW.REGION (#S(REGION :LEFT 461 .-BOTTOM 686 :WIDTH 242 : HEIGHT 60))) 

86 

(ATTACHED-OBJECTS (#lSlot: START- WALKER AS V -COMMANDER ASV OWN])) 

(LISP.WINDOW (ASV. VIEWPORT-START-WALKER-OF-ASV-COMMANDER.3. WINDOW .4 117)) 
(MAPPING ((0 0 1 1))) 

(TITLE ("Asv-Commandcr’s Start- Walker”)) 

(VIEWED.PICTURE (#[Unit: INVISIBLE.PIC'TURE.8 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)])) 
(CACHED.PICTURE.REGIONS 

((#[Unit: BOX-STRING-START-WALKER-OF-ASV-COMMANDER.3 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] : OTHER 
. #S (REG ION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 -.WIDTH 226 :HEIGHT 32)))) 

(ACTUATOR (#[Unit: BOX-STRING-START- WALKER-OF-ASV-COMMANDER.3 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)])) 
(AVPUT (METHOD- ACTUATOR-RESPONSE)) 

)) 

(ABSTRACT.UNITDEF.FORMAT.1 (COMPACT.UNIT) 
BOX-STRING-START-WALKER-OF-ASV-COMMANDER.3 
0 

((AI3-BOX-STRINGS ACTIVEIMAGES3)) 

0 

( 

(BORDERS (0)) 

(STRINGS ((” AS V> AS V-COMMANDER:: START-W ALKER ! method"))) 

(WRAPP (NIL)) 

(WIDTH (226)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(SUPERPICTURE (#[Unif INVISIBLE.PICTURE.8 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)])) 

(JUSTIFICATION.H (CENTER)) 

(JUSTIFICATIONS (CENTER)) 

(FONT (* MEDIUM-FONT*)) 

(REGION.OF.SUBPICTURES (#S(REGION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 :WIDTH 226 : HEIGHT 32))) 

(REGION (#S(REGION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 :WIDTH 226 : HEIGHT 32))) 

(HEIGHT (32)) 

(OPAQUEP (T)) 

(POSITION (#S (POSITION :X 0 :Y 0))) 

)) 

(ABSTRACT.UNITDEF.FORMAT.1 (COMPACT.UNIT) 

INVISIBLE.PICTURE.8 

0 

87 

((INVISIBLE.PICTURES KEEPICTURES)) 

0 

( 

(VIEWPORTS (#[Unifc VIEWPORT-START-WALKER-OF-ASV-COMMANDER.3 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)])) 
(POSITION (#S(POSITION :X 0 :Y 0))) 

(REGION (NIL)) 

(REGION.OF.SUBPICTURES (#S(REGION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 :WIDTH 209 : HEIGHT 22))) 
(SUBPICTURES (#[Unit: BOX-STRING-START- WALKER-OF-ASV-COMMANDER.3 ASV (COMPACT.UNI' 
(MOUSERIGHTFN! (KPOBJECT-MOUSEANYFN)) 

(MOUSELEFTFN! (KPOBJECT-MOUSEANYFN)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(MOUSEMIDDLEFN! (PICTURE-MOVE-MOUSEFN)) 

)) 

(ASV -COMMANDER 

("goodpasturer" "9-11-87 10:20:50" "goodpasturer" "12-2-87 13:18:47") 

NIL 

(COMMANDERS) 

NIL 

0 

((INITIAL IZE-TERRAIN 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT INITPOS GOAL) 

(ASSERT NIL ’ SET.UP.TERR AIN.RULES ) 

(PUT. VALUE ’ASV ’POSITION (GET. VALUE INITPOS ’POSITION)) 

(PUT. VALUE ’ASV ’NODE.LOC INITPOS) 

(PUT. VALUE ’TERRAIN2 ’GOAL GOAL) 

(PUT. VALUE ’GOAL.LABEL ’POSITION (GET. VALUE (GET. VALUE ’TERRAIN2 ’GOAL) ’POSITION)) 
(PUT. VALUE ’ASV-DRIVER ’RELATIVE.LOCATION ’NOT.AT.GOAL) 

(INITIAL IZE.KEEWORLDS) 

(UNITMSG ’TANK- WORLD ’REDISPLAY.HARD!))) 

METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES]) NIL 

((ACTIVEIMAGES3 (#[Unit: VIEWPORT-INITIALIZE-TERRAIN-OF-ASV-COMMANDER.4 ASV (COMPACT 
. UNIQUE. VALUES))) 

(START-WALKER 
((LAMBDA (THISUNIT) 

(SETQ BACKTRACK NIL) 

88 

(DO ((A 1 (+ 1 A))) 

((EQUAL (GET. VALUE ’ASV-DRIVER ’RELATIVE.LOCATION) ’AT.GOAL) NIL) 

(UNITMSG ’ASV-DRIVER ’VISION) 

(UNITMSG ’ASV-DRIVER ’SEEK.GOAL)) 

(UNITMSG ’TALK ’STOP))) 

METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES]) NIL 

((ACTIVEIMAGES3 (#[Unit: VIEWPORT-START- WALKER-OF-ASV-COMMANDER.3 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)]) 

. UNIQUE. VALUES))) 

)) 

( ABSTRACT. UNITDEF.FORMAT. 1 (COMPACT.UNIT) 
VIEWPORT-INITIALIZE-TERRAIN-OF-ASV-COMMANDER.4 
0 

((AI3-SLOT-VIEWPORTS ACTIVEIMAGES3)) 

0 

( 

(TITLE.FONT (*MEDIUM-BOLD-FONT*)) 

(BORDERS (8)) 

(IMAGE-CLASS (#[Unit: METHOD-ACTUATORS ACTIVEIMAGES3])) 

(SCROLL.ON.P (NIL)) 

(MOUSELEFTFN! (METHOD-ACTUATOR)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(LISPAVINDOW.REGION (#S(REGION :LEFT460 .-BOTTOM 615 :WIDTH 257 : HEIGHT 60))) 
(ATTACHED-OBJECTS (#[Slot: INITIALIZE-TERRAIN ASV -COMMANDER ASV OWN])) 

(LISP. WINDOW (AS V. VIEWPORT -INITIALIZE-TERRAIN-OF- AS V -COMMANDER.4 .WINDOW .4 1 1 8)) 
(MAPPING ((0 0 1 1))) 

(TITLE ("Asv-Commander’s Initialize-Terrain")) 

(VIEWED.PICTURE (#[Unit: INVISIBLE.PICTURE.9 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)])) 

(CACHED.PICTURE.REGIONS 

((#[Unit: BOX-STRING-INITIALIZE-TERRAIN-OF-ASV-COMMANDER.4 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] -.OTHER 
. #S(REGION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 : WIDTH 241 :HEIGHT 32)))) 

(ACTUATOR (#[Unit: BOX-STRING-INITIALIZE-TERRAIN-OF-ASV-COMMANDER.4 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)])) 
(AVPUT (METHOD-ACTUATOR-RESPONSE)) 

)) 

( ABSTR ACT.UNITDEF.FORMAT. 1 (COMPACT.UNIT) 

89 

BOX-STRING-INI TIALIZE -TERRAIN-OF- AS V-C0MMANDER.4 

0 

((AI3-BOX-STRINGS ACTIVEIMAGES3)) 

0 

( 

(BORDERS (0)) 

(STRINGS ((” AS V> AS V -COMMANDER: INITIALIZE -TERR AIN [method"))) 

(WRAPP (NIL)) 

(WIDTH (241)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(SUPERPICTURE (#[Unit: INVISIBLE.PICTURE.9 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)])) 

(JUSTIFICATIONS (CENTER)) 

(JUSTIFICATION. V (CENTER)) 

(FONT (* MEDIUM-FONT*)) 

(REGION.OF.SUBPICTURES (#S(REGION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 : WIDTH 241 : HEIGHT 32))) 

(REGION (#S(REGION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 :WIDTH 241 : HEIGHT 32))) 

(HEIGHT (32)) 

(OPAQUEP (T)) 

(POSITION (#S(POSITION :X 0 :Y 0))) 

)) 

(ABSTR ACT.UNITDEF.FORMAT. 1 (COMPACT.UNIT) 

INVISIBLE.PICTURE.9 

0 

((INVISIBLE .PICTURES KEEPICTURES)) 

0 

( 

(VIEWPORTS (#[UniU VIEWPORT-INITIALIZE-TERRAIN-OF-ASV-COMMANDER.4 ASV (COMPACT.UNI 
(POSITION (#S(POSITION :X 0 :Y 0))) 

(REGION (NIL)) 

(REGION.OF.SUBPICTURES (#S(REGION :LEFT 0 : BOTTOM 0 :WIDTH 227 : HEIGHT 32))) 
(SUBPICTURES (#[Unit: BOX-STRING-INITIALIZE-TERRAIN-OF-ASV-COMMANDER.4 ASV (COMPACT' 
(MOUSERIGHTFN! (KPOB JECT -MOUSEANYFN)) 

(MOUSELEFTFN! (KPOB JECT -MOUSEANYFN)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(MOUSEMIDDLEFN! (PICTURE-MOVE-MOUSEFN)) 

90 

)) 

(TALK 

("GOODPASTURER" "10-29-87 9:07:15" "goodpasturer” "12-2-87 13:30:10") 

NIL 

(IRIS.COMMS (CLASSES GENERICUNITS)) 

NIL 

0 

((ACCELERATE-X ((LAMBDA (THISUNITT) (AX))) METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES]) NIL 
((ACTIVE IMAGES 3 NIL . VARIABLE. VALUES))) 

(ACCELERATE-Y ((LAMBDA (THISUNITT) (AY))) METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES]) NIL 
((ACTIVEIMAGES3 NIL . VARIABLE. VALUES))) 

(DECELERATE-X ((LAMBDA (THISUNITT) (DX))) METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES]) NIL 
(( ACTI VEIMAGES 3 NIL . V ARI ABLE. V ALUES))) 

(DECELERATE- Y ((LAMBDA (THISUNITT) (DY))) METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES]) NIL 
((ACTI VEIMAGES 3 NIL . VARIABLE. VALUES))) 

(DIS CONNECT.COMMS ((LAMBDA (THISUNITT) (H) (END-CON))) METHOD (#[ Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPI 
NIL 

((ACTI VEIMAGES 3 (#[Unit: VIEWPORT-DISCONNECT.COMMS-OF-TALK.5 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)]) 

. UNIQUE. VALUES) 

(COMMENT "method"))) 

(FORWARD.WAVE.GAIT ((LAMBDA (THISUNITT) (F))) METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES])) 
(LISTEN ((LAMBDA (THISUNITT) (SEND TALK :GET-AN-OBJECT-FROM-IRlS))) 

METHOD 

(#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES]) 

NIL 

((ACTI VEIMAGES 3 NIL . V ARI ABLE. V ALUES ))) 

(STOP ((LAMBDA (THISUNIIT) (S))) METHOD (#[Unit: METHOD KEEDATATYPES])) 

)) 

(ABSTRACT. UNITDEFTORMAT. 1 (COMPACT.UNIT) 

VIEWPORT-DISCONNECT.COMMS -OF-TALK.5 

0 

((AI3-SLOT-VIEWPORTS ACTI VEIMAGES 3)) 

0 

( 

91 

(TITLE.FONT (*MEDIUM-BOLD-FONT*)) 

(BORDERS (8)) 

(IMAGE-CLASS (#[Unit: METHOD- ACTUATORS ACTIVEIMAGES3])) 

(SCROLL.ON.P (NIL)) 

(MOUSELEFTFN! (METHOD-ACTUATOR)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(LISP.WINDOW.REGION (#S(REGION :LEFT 347 :BOTTOM 546 :WIDTH 212 : HEIGHT 60))) 
(ATTACHED-OBJECTS (#[Slot: DISCONNECT.COMMS TALK ASV OWN])) 

(LISP. WINDOW (ASV.VIEWPORT-DISCONNECT.COMMS-OF-TALK.5.WINDOW.4129)) 
(MAPPING ((0 0 1 1))) 

(TITLE ("Talk’s Disconnect. Comms”)) 

(VIEWED.PICTURE (#[Unit: INVISIBLE.PICTURE.il ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)])) 
(CACHED.PICTURE.REGIONS 

((#[Unit: BOX-STRING-DISCONNECT.COMMS-OF-TALK.5 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)] :OTHER 
. #S(REGION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 :WIDTH 196 :HEIGHT 32)))) 

(ACTUATOR (#[Unit: BOX-STRING-DISCONNECT. COMMS -OF-TALK.5 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT’)])) 
(AVPUT (METHOD-ACTUATOR-RESPONSE)) 

)) 

(ABSTRACT.UNITDEF.FORMAT. 1 (COMPACT.UNIT) 

BOX-STRING-DISCONNECT. COMMS-OF-TALK.5 

0 

((AI3-BOX-STRINGS ACTIVEIMAGES3)) 

0 

( 

(BORDERS (0)) 

(STRINGS (("AS V>TALK::DIS CONNECT.COMMS ! method"))) 

(WRAPP (NIL)) 

(WIDTH (196)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(SUPERPICTURE (#[Unit: INVISIBLE.PICTURE.il ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)])) 

(JUSTIFICATIONS (CENTER)) 

(JUSTIFICATION. V (CENTER)) 

(FONT (*MEDIUM-FONT*)) 

(REGION.OF.SUBPICTURES (#S(REGION :LEFT 0 .-BOTTOM 0 .’WIDTH 196 : HEIGHT 32))) 
(REGION (#S (REGION :LEFT 0 rBOTTOM 0 :WIDTH 196 : HEIGHT 32))) 

92 

(HEIGHT (32)) 

(OPAQUEP (T)) 

(POSITION (#S (POSITION :X 0 :Y 0))) 

)) 

(ABSTRACT.UNITDEF.FORMAT. 1 (COMPACT.UNIT) 

INVISIBLE.PICTURE.il 

0 

((INVISIBLE .PICTURES KEEPICTURES)) 

0 

( 

(VIEWPORTS (#[Unit: VIEWPORT-DISCONNECT.COMMS-OF-TALK.5 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)])) 
(POSITION (#S(POSITION :X 0 :Y 0))) 

(REGION (NIL)) 

(REGION.OF.SUBPICTURES (#S(REGION :LEFT 0 :BOTTOM 0 :WIDTH 235 : HEIGHT 24))) 
(SUBPICTURES (#[Unit: BOX-STRING-DISCONNECT.COMMS-OF-TALK.5 ASV (COMPACT.UNIT)])) 
(MOUSERIGHTFN! (KPOBJECT-MOUSEANYFN)) 

(MOU S ELEFTFN ! (KPOBJECT-MOUSEANYFN)) 

(OPENP (OPEN)) 

(MOU S EMIDDLEFN ! (PICTURE-MOVE-MOUSEFN)) 

)) 

KBEnd 

93 

APPENDIX B - TRIAL RESULTS 

>ASV TERRAIN 

o o oooooooo 
o©oooooooo 
oooooooooo 

OOOOOOOOOO 

OOOOOOOOOO 

OOOOOOOOOO 

OOOOOOOOOO 

O 00AL O oooooooo 

TERRAIN EXAMPLE 1 

94 

Easv ter R ;'.n model r 1 - ^ 

■ --^— -s-iv -»—• -« < - v - 

o o o o o o o 
o o o o o o o 
o o o o o o o 

o o 
o o 

o © 
o © 

Q 

o o 
o o 
o o 

c£> oooooooo 

TERRAIN EXAMPLE 1 RESULTS 

95 

TERRAIN EXAMPLE 2 

96 

I ASV TERRAIN MODEL E 

■■■—■■■■— — III^Mf - - • - - ' 

S3 tKS 

3 O O € 

® ® o i 

no® 

® o 

o o 
o o o 
o o o o 

ooooooooo 
ooooooooo 
OZP oooooooo 

TERRAIN EXAMPLE 2 RESULTS 

97 

LIST OF REFERENCES 

[1] KEE Software Development System User’s Manual (Version 3.0), Intellicorp, 
Mountain View, California, 1986 . 

[2] Waldron, K. J. and McGhee, R. B., “The Adaptive Suspension Vehicle,” IEEE 
Control Systems Magazine , December 1986 . 

[3] Lyman, R., A Computer Simulation Study of Tripod F ollow-the-Leader Gait 
Coordination for a Hexapod Walking Machine, M. S. Thesis, Naval Postgraduate 
School, Monterey, California, June 1987. 

[4] Giralt, G., Chatila, R., and Vaisset, M., “An Integrated Navigation and Motion 
Control System for Autonomous Multisensory Mobile Robots,” in Robotics 
Research: The First International Symposium, ed. by Michael Brady and Richard 
Paul, The MIT Press, 1984 . 

[5] McGhee, R. B. and Iswandhi, G. I., “Adaptive Locomotion of a Multilegged 
Robot over Rough Terrain,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, Cybernetics, 
SMC -9, April 1979 . 

[6] McGhee, R. B., “Vehicular Legged Locomotion,” in Advances in Automation and 
Robotics, ed. by G. N. Saridis, Jai Press, 1985 . 

[7] Brooks, R. A., “Planning Collision Free Motions for Pick and Place Operations,” 
in Robotics Research: The First International Symposium, ed. by Michael Brady 
and Richard Paul, The MIT Press, 1984 . 

[8] Richbourg, R. F., Rowe, N. C., Zyda, M. J., and McGhee, R. B., “Solving Global, 
Two-dimensional Routing Problems Using Snell’s Law and A* Search,” 
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 
April 1987 . 

[9] Mitchell, J. S. B. and Papadimtriou, C. H., The Weighted Region Problem, 
Technical Report, Department of Operations Research, Stanford University, 

98 

October 1985 (revised July 1986). 

[10] Richbourg, R. F., Solving a Class of Spatial Reasoning Problems: Minimal-Cost 
Path Planning in the Cartesian Plane, Ph.D. dissertation, Naval Postgraduate 
School, Monterey, California, June 1987. 

[11] Flynn, A. M., Redundant Sensors for Mobile Robot Navigation, Technical Report 
859, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, October 1985. 

[12] Kwak, S. H., A Computer Simulation Study of a Free Gait Motion Coordination 
Algorithm for Rough-Terrain Locomotion by a Hexapod Walking Machine, Ph.D. 
dissertation. The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, August 1986. 

[13] Lee, W. J., A Computer Simulation Study of Omnidirectional Supervisory Control 
for Rough-Terrain Locomotion by a Multilegged Robot Vehicle, Ph.D. dissertation, 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, March 1984. 

[14] IRIS User’s Guide , Silicon Graphics, Inc. , Mountain View, California, 1986 . 

[15] ART Reference Manual, Inference Corporation, Los Angeles, California, 1985 . 

[16] Texas Instrument Explorer User’s Manual, Texas Instrument Inc., Austin, Texas, 
1985. 

99 

INITIAL DISTRIBUTION LIST 

No. Copies 

1. Defense Technical Information Center 2 

Cameron Station 

Alexandria, Virginia 22304-6145 

2. Library, Code 0142 2 

Naval Postgraduate School 

Monterey, California 93943-5002 

3. Chief of Naval Operations 1 

Director, Information Systems (OP-945) 

Navy Department 
Washington, D.C. 20350-2000 

4. Department Chairman, Code 62 1 

Department of Electronics and Computer Engineering 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, California 93943-5000 

5. Curriculum Officer, Code 32 1 

Department of Electronics and Computer Engineering 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, California 93943-5000 

6. Professor Robert B. McGhee (Code 52Mz) 15 

Computer Science Department 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, California 93943-5000 

7. Professor Roberto Cristi (Code 62CX) 1 

Department of Electronics and Computer Engineering 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, California 93943-5000 

8. Department Chairman, Code 69 1 

Department of Mechanical Engineering 

Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, California 93943-5000 

100 

1 

9. Professor D. L. Smith (Code 69Sm) 

Department of Mechanical Engineering 
Naval Postgraduate School 
Monterey, California 93943-5000 

10. Major Robert Richbourg 1 

USMA 

Office of Artificial Intelligence Analysis and Evaluation 
Attention: MADN-B 
Westpoint, New York 10996 

1 1. Prof. Kenneth J. Waldron 1 

Department of Mechanical Engineering 

Ohio State University 
206 W. 18th Avenue 
Columbus, Ohio 43210 

12. Prof. C. A. Klein 1 

Department of Electrical Engineering 

Ohio State University 
2015 Neil Ave. 

Columbus, Ohio 43210 

13. Dr. Wm. Isler 1 

DARPA/ISTO 

1400 Wilson Blvd. 

Arlington, Virginia 22209 

14. Research Administration (Code 012) 1 

Naval Postgraduate School 

Monterey, California 93943 

101 

' 

1 

18 7 6 7 • 1 / ^ 

Thesis 
G5685 
c . 1 

DTTPT^Tr --- TA , r 

W 1 , - . 

Goodpasture 

A computer simulation 
study of an expert system 
for walking machine mo- 
tion planning. 

trrn^rY 

SCHOOL 

wlj 9o 943 8002 

thesG5685 

A computer simulation study of an expert 

3 2768 000 77196 8 

DUDLEY KNOX LIBRARY 

rmmh 

■'imm 

Introduction

I LOOKED AT MY NOTES AND I DIDN'T LIKE THEM. I'd spent three days at U. S. Robots and might as well have spent them at home with the Encyclopedia Tellurica.
Susan Calvin had been born in the year 1982, they said, which made her seventy-five now. Everyone knew that. Appropriately enough, U. S. Robot and Mechanical Men, Inc. was seventy-five also, since it had been in the year of Dr. Calvin's birth that Lawrence Robertson had first taken out incorporation papers for what eventually became the strangest industrial giant in man's history. Well, everyone knew that, too.
At the age of twenty, Susan Calvin had been part of the particular Psycho-Math seminar at which Dr. Alfred Lanning of U. S. Robots had demonstrated the first mobile robot to be equipped with a voice. It was a large, clumsy unbeautiful robot, smelling of machine-oil and destined for the projected mines on Mercury. But it could speak and make sense.
Susan said nothing at that seminar; took no part in the hectic discussion period that followed. She was a frosty girl, plain and colorless, who protected herself against a world she disliked by a masklike expression and a hypertrophy of intellect. But as she watched and listened, she felt the stirrings of a cold enthusiasm.
She obtained her bachelor's degree at Columbia in 2003 and began graduate work in cybernetics.
All that had been done in the mid-twentieth century on "calculating machines" had been upset by Robertson and his positronic brain-paths. The miles of relays and photocells had given way to the spongy globe of plantinumiridium about the size of a human brain.
She learned to calculate the parameters necessary to fix the possible variables within the "positronic brain"; to construct "brains" on paper such that the responses to given stimuli could be accurately predicted.
In 2008, she obtained her Ph.D. and joined United States Robots as a "Robopsychologist," becoming the first great practitioner of a new science. Lawrence Robertson was still president of the corporation; Alfred Lanning had become director of research.
For fifty years, she watched the direction of human progress change and leap ahead.
Now she was retiring - as much as she ever could. At least, she was allowing someone else's name to be inset upon the door of her office.
That, essentially, was what I had. I had a long list of her
published papers, of the patents in her name; I had the
chronological details of her promotions. In short I had her
professional "vita" in full detail.
But that wasn't what I wanted.
I needed more than that for my feature articles for Interplanetary Press. Much more.
I told her so.
"Dr. Calvin," I said, as lushly as possible, "in the mind of the public you and U. S. Robots are identical. Your retirement will end an era and-"
"You want the human-interest angle?" She didn't smile at me. I don't think she ever smiles. But her eyes were sharp, though not angry. I felt her glance slide through me and out my occiput and knew that I was uncommonly transparent to her; that everybody was.
But I said, "That's right."
"Human interest out of robots? A contradiction."
"No, doctor. Out of you."
"Well, I've been called a robot myself. Surely, they've told you I'm not human."
They had, but there was no point in saying so.
She got up from her chair. She wasn't tall and she looked frail. I followed her to the window and we looked out.
The offices and factories of U. S. Robots were a small city; spaced and planned. It was flattened out like an aerial photograph.
"When I first came here," she said, "I had a little room in a building right about there where the fire-house is now." She pointed. "It was torn down before you were born. I shared the room with three others. I had half a desk. We built our robots all in one building. Output - three a week. Now look at us."
"Fifty Years," I hackneyed, "is a long time."
"Not when you're looking back at them," she said. "You wonder how they vanished so quickly."
She went back to her desk and sat down. She didn't need expression on her face to look sad, somehow.
"How old are you?" she wanted to know.
"Thirty-two," I said.
"Then you don't remember a world without robots. There was a time when humanity faced the universe alone and without a friend. Now he has creatures to help him; stronger creatures than himself, more faithful, more useful, and absolutely devoted to him. Mankind is no longer alone. Have you ever thought of it that way?"
"I'm afraid I haven't. May I quote you?"
"You may. To you, a robot is a robot. Gears and metal; electricity and positrons. Mind and iron! Human-made! It necessary, human-destroyed! But you haven't worked with them, so you don't know them. They're a cleaner better breed than we are."
I tried to nudge her gently with words, "We'd like to hear some of the things you could tell us; get your views on robots. The Interplanetary Press reaches the entire Solar System. Potential audience is three billion, Dr. Calvin. They ought to know what you could tell them on robots."
It wasn't necessary to nudge. She didn't hear me, but she was moving in the right direction.
"They might have known that from the start. We sold robots for Earth-use then - before my time it was, even. Of course, that was when robots could not talk. Afterward, they became more human and opposition began. The labor unions, of course, naturally opposed robot competition for human jobs, and various segments of religious opinion had their superstitious objections. It was all quite ridiculous and quite useless. And yet there it was."
I was taking it down verbatim on my pocket-recorder, trying not to show the knuckle-motions of my hand. If you practice a bit, you can get to the point where you can record accurately without taking the little gadget out of your pocket.
"Take the case of Robbie," she said. "I never knew him. He was dismantled the year before I joined the company - hopelessly out-of-date. But I saw the little girl in the museum-"
She stopped, but I didn't say anything. I let her eyes mist up and her mind travel back. She had lots of time to cover.
"I heard about it later, and when they called us blasphemers and demon-creators, I always thought of him. Robbie was a non-vocal robot. He couldn't speak. He was made and sold in 1996. Those were the days before extreme specialization, so he was sold as a nursemaid-"
"As a what?"
"As a nursemaid-"

Robbie

"NINETY-EIGHT - NINETY-NINE - ONE HUNDRED." Gloria withdrew 
her chubby little forearm from before her eyes and stood for a moment, 
wrinkling her nose and blinking in the sunlight. Then, trying to watch in all directions at once, she withdrew a few cautious steps from the tree against which she had been leaning.
She craned her neck to investigate the possibilities of a clump of bushes to the right and then withdrew farther to obtain a better angle for viewing its dark recesses. The quiet was profound except for the incessant buzzing of insects and the occasional chirrup of some hardy bird, braving the midday sun.
Gloria pouted, "I bet he went inside the house, and I've told him a million times that that's not fair."
With tiny lips pressed together tightly and a severe frown crinkling her forehead, she moved determinedly toward the two-story building up past the driveway.
Too late she heard the rustling sound behind her, followed by the distinctive and rhythmic clump-clump of Robbie's metal feet. She whirled about to see her triumphing companion emerge from hiding and make for the home-tree at full speed.
Gloria shrieked in dismay. "Wait, Robbie! That wasn't fair, Robbie! You promised you wouldn't run until I found you." Her little feet could make no headway at all against Robbie's giant strides. Then, within ten feet of the goal, Robbie's pace slowed suddenly to the merest of crawls, and Gloria, with one final burst of wild speed, dashed pantingly past him to touch the welcome bark of home-tree first.
Gleefully, she turned on the faithful Robbie, and with the basest of ingratitude, rewarded him for his sacrifice by taunting him cruelly for a lack of running ability.
"Robbie can't run," she shouted at the top of her eight-year. old voice. "I can beat him any day. I can beat him any day." She chanted the words in a shrill rhythm.
Robbie didn't answer, of course-not in words. He pantomimed running instead, inching away until Gloria found herself running after him as he dodged her narrowly, forcing her to veer in helpless circles, little arms outstretched and fanning at the air.
"Robbie," she squealed, "stand still!" - And the laughter was forced out of her in breathless jerks.
-Until he turned suddenly and caught her up, whirling her round, so that for her the world fell away for a moment with a blue emptiness beneath, and green trees stretching hungrily downward toward the void. Then she was down in the grass again, leaning against Robbie's leg and still holding a hard, metal finger.
After a while, her breath returned. She pushed uselessly at her disheveled hair in vague imitation of one of her mother's gestures and twisted to see if her dress were torn.
She slapped her hand against Robbie's torso, "Bad boy! I'll spank you!"
And Robbie cowered, holding his hands over his face so that she had to add, "No, I won't, Robbie. I won't spank you. But anyway, it's my turn to hide how because you've got longer legs and you promised not to run till I found you."
Robbie nodded his head - a small parallelepiped with rounded edges and corners attached to a similar but much larger parallelepiped that served as torso by means of a short, flexible stalk - and obediently faced the tree. A thin, metal film descended over his glowing eyes and from within his body came a steady, resonant ticking.
"Don't peek now - and don't skip any numbers," warned Gloria, and scurried for cover.
With unvarying regularity, seconds were ticked off, and at the hundredth, up went the eyelids, and the glowing red of Robbie's eyes swept the prospect. They rested for a moment on a bit of colorful gingham that protruded from behind a boulder. He advanced a few steps and convinced himself that it was Gloria who squatted behind it.
Slowly, remaining always between Gloria and home-tree, he advanced on the hiding place, and when Gloria was plainly in sight and could no longer even theorize to herself that she was not seen, he extended one arm toward her, slapping the other against his leg so that it rang again. Gloria emerged sulkily.
"You peeked!" she exclaimed, with gross unfairness. "Besides I'm tired of playing hide-and-seek. I want a ride."
But Robbie was hurt at the unjust accusation, so he seated
himself carefully and shook his head ponderously from side to side.
Gloria changed her tone to one of gentle coaxing immediately, "Come on, Robbie. I didn't mean it about the peeking. Give me a ride."
Robbie was not to be won over so easily, though. He gazed stubbornly at the sky, and shook his head even more emphatically.
"Please, Robbie, please give me a ride." She encircled his neck with rosy arms and hugged tightly. Then, changing moods in a moment, she moved away. "If you don't, I'm going to cry," and her face twisted appallingly in preparation.
Hard-hearted Robbie paid scant attention to this dreadful possibility, and shook his head a third time. Gloria found it necessary to play her trump card.
"If you don't," she exclaimed warmly, "I won't tell you any more stories, that's all. Not one-"
Robbie gave in immediately and unconditionally before this ultimatum, nodding his head vigorously until the metal of his neck hummed. Carefully, he raised the little girl and placed her on his broad, fiat shoulders.
Gloria's threatened tears vanished immediately and she crowed with delight. Robbie's metal skin, kept at a constant temperature of seventy by the high resistance coils within, felt nice and comfortable, while the beautifully loud sound her heels made as they bumped rhythmically against his chest was enchanting.
"You're an air-coaster, Robbie, you're a big, silver aircoaster. Hold out your arms straight. - You got to, Robbie, if you're going to be an aircoaster."
The logic was irrefutable. Robbie's arms were wings catching the air currents and he was a silver 'coaster.
Gloria twisted the robot's head and leaned to the right. He banked sharply. Gloria equipped the 'coaster with a motor that went "Br-r-r" and then with weapons that went "Powie" and "Sh-sh-shshsh." Pirates were giving chase and the ship's blasters were coming into play. The pirates dropped in a steady rain.
"Got another one. Two more," she cried.
Then "Faster, men," Gloria said pompously, "we're running out of ammunition." She aimed over her shoulder with undaunted courage and Robbie was a blunt-nosed spaceship zooming through the void at maximum acceleration.
Clear across the field he sped, to the patch of tall grass on
the other side, where he stopped with a suddenness that evoked a shriek from his flushed rider, and then tumbled her onto the soft, green carpet.
Gloria gasped and panted, and gave voice to intermittent whispered exclamations of "That was nice!"
Robbie waited until she had caught her breath and then pulled gently at a lock of hair.
"You want something?" said Gloria, eyes wide in an apparently artless complexity that fooled her huge "nursemaid" not at all. He pulled the curl harder.
"Oh, I know. You want a story."
Robbie nodded rapidly.
"Which one?"
Robbie made a semi-circle in the air with one finger.
The little girl protested, "Again? I've told you Cinderella a million times. Aren't you tired of it? -It's for babies."
Another semi-circle.
"Oh, well," Gloria composed herself, ran over the details of the tale in her mind (together with her own elaborations, of which she had several) and began:
"Are you ready? Well - once upon a time there was a beautiful little girl whose name was Ella. And she had a terribly cruel step-mother and two very ugly and very cruel step-sisters and-"

Gloria was reaching the very climax of the tale - midnight was striking and everything was changing back to the shabby originals lickety-split, while Robbie listened tensely with burning eyes - when the interruption came.
"Gloria!"
It was the high-pitched sound of a woman who has been calling not once, but several times; and had the nervous tone of one in whom anxiety was beginning to overcome impatience.
"Mamma's calling me," said Gloria, not quite happily. "You'd better carry me back to the house, Robbie."
Robbie obeyed with alacrity for somehow there was that in him which judged it best to obey Mrs. Weston, without as much as a scrap of hesitation. Gloria's father was rarely home in the daytime except on Sunday - today, for instance - and when he was, he proved a genial and understanding person. Gloria's mother, however, was a source of uneasiness to Robbie and there was always the impulse to sneak away from her sight.
Mrs. Weston caught sight of them the minute they rose above the masking tufts of long grass and retired inside the house to wait.
"I've shouted myself hoarse, Gloria," she said, severely. "Where were you?"
"I was with Robbie," quavered Gloria. "I was telling him Cinderella, and I forgot it was dinner-time."
"Well, it's a pity Robbie forgot, too." Then, as if that reminded her of the robot's presence, she whirled upon him. "You may go, Robbie. She doesn't need you now." Then, brutally, "And don't come back till I call you."
Robbie turned to go, but hesitated as Gloria cried out in his defense, "Wait, Mamma, you got to let him stay. I didn't finish Cinderella for him. I said I would tell him Cinderella and I'm not finished."
"Gloria!"
"Honest and truly, Mamma, he'll stay so quiet, you won't even know he's here. He can sit on the chair in the corner, and he won't say a word,I mean he won't do anything. Will you, Robbie?"
Robbie, appealed to, nodded his massive head up and down once.
"Gloria, if you don't stop this at once, you shan't see Robbie for a whole week."
The girl's eyes fell, "All right! But Cinderella is his favorite story and I didn't finish it. -And he likes it so much."
The robot left with a disconsolate step and Gloria choked back a sob.

George Weston was comfortable. It was a habit of his to be comfortable on Sunday afternoons. A good, hearty dinner below the hatches; a nice, soft, dilapidated couch on which to sprawl; a copy of the Times; slippered feet and shirtless chest; how could anyone help but be comfortable?
He wasn't pleased, therefore, when his wife walked in. After ten years of married life, be still was so unutterably foolish as to love her, and there was no question that he was always glad to see her - still Sunday afternoons just after dinner were sacred to him and his idea of solid comfort was to be left in utter solitude for two or three hours. Consequently, he fixed his eye firmly upon the latest reports of the Lefebre-Yoshida expedition to Mars (this one was to take off from Lunar Base and might actually succeed) and pretended she wasn't there.
Mrs. Weston waited patiently for two minutes, then impatiently for two more, and finally broke the silence.
"George!"
"Hmpph?"
"George, I say! Will you put down that paper and look at me?"
The paper rustled to the floor and Weston turned a weary face toward his wife, "What is it, dear?"
"You know what it is, George. It's Gloria and that terrible machine."
"What terrible machine?"
"Now don't pretend you don't know what I'm talking about. It's that robot Gloria calls Robbie. He doesn't leave her for a moment."
"Well, why should he? He's not supposed to. And he certainly isn't a terrible machine. He's the best darn robot money can buy and I'm damned sure he set me back half a year's income. He's worth it, though - darn sight cleverer than half my office staff."
He made a move to pick up the paper again, but his wife was quicker and snatched it away.
"You listen to me, George. I won't have my daughter entrusted to a machine - and I don't care how clever it is. It has no soul, and no one knows what it may be thinking. A child just isn't made to be guarded by a thing of metal."
Weston frowned, "When did you decide this? He's been with Gloria two years now and I haven't seen you worry till now."
"It was different at first. It was a novelty; it took a load off me, and - and it was a fashionable thing to do. But now I don't know. The neighbors-"
"Well, what have the neighbors to do with it. Now, look. A robot is infinitely more to be trusted than a human nursemaid. Robbie was constructed for only one purpose really -  to be the companion of a little child. His entire `mentality' has been created for the purpose. He just can't help being faithful and loving and kind. He's a machine-made so. That's more than you can say for humans."
"But something might go wrong. Some- some-" Mrs. Weston was a bit hazy about the insides of a robot, "some little jigger will come loose and the awful thing will go berserk and- and-" She couldn't bring herself to complete the quite obvious thought.
"Nonsense," Weston denied, with an involuntary nervous shiver. "That's completely ridiculous. We had a long discussion at the time we bought Robbie about the First Law of Robotics. You know that it is impossible for a robot to harm a human being; that long before enough can go wrong to alter that First Law, a robot would be completely inoperable. It's a mathematical impossibility. Besides I have an engineer from U. S. Robots here twice a year to give the poor gadget
a complete overhaul. Why, there's no more chance of any thing at all going wrong with Robbie than there is of you or I suddenly going looney - considerably less, in fact. Besides, how are you going to take him away from Gloria?"
He made another futile stab at the paper and his wife tossed it angrily into the next room.
"That's just it, George! She won't play with anyone else. There are dozens of little boys and girls that she should make friends with, but she won't. She won't go near them unless I make her. That's no way for a little girl to grow up. You want her to be normal, don't you? You want her to be able to take her part in society."
"You're jumping at shadows, Grace. Pretend Robbie's a dog. I've seen hundreds of children who would rather have their dog than their father."
"A dog is different, George. We must get rid of that horrible thing. You can sell it back to the company. I've asked, and you can."
"You've asked? Now look here, Grace, let's not go off the deep end. We're keeping the robot until Gloria is older and I don't want the subject brought up again." And with that he walked out of the room in a huff.

Mrs. Weston met her husband at the door two evenings later. "You'll have to listen to this, George. There's bad feeling in the village."
"About what?" asked Weston. He stepped into the washroom and drowned out any possible answer by the splash of water.
Mrs. Weston waited. She said, "About Robbie."
Weston stepped out, towel in hand, face red and angry, "What are you talking about?"
"Oh, it's been building up and building up. I've tried to close my eyes to it, but I'm not going to any more. Most of the villagers consider Robbie dangerous. Children aren't allowed to go near our place in the evenings."
"We trust _our_ child with the thing."
"Well, people aren't reasonable about these things."
"Then to hell with them."
"Saying that doesn't solve the problem. I've got to do my shopping down there. I've got to meet them every day. And it's even worse in the city these days when it comes to robots. New York has just passed an ordinance keeping all robots off the streets between sunset and sunrise."
"All right, but they can't stop us from keeping a robot in our home. -Grace, this is one of your campaigns. I recognize it. But it's no use. The answer is still, no! We're keeping Robbie!"

And yet he loved his wife - and what was worse, his wife knew it. George Weston, after all, was only a man - poor thing - and his wife made full use of every device which a clumsier and more scrupulous sex has learned, with reason and futility, to fear.
Ten times in the ensuing week, he cried, "Robbie stays,and that's final!" and each time it was weaker and accompanied by a louder and more agonized groan.
Came the day at last, when Weston approached his daughter guiltily and suggested a "beautiful" visivox show in the village.
Gloria clapped her hands happily, "Can Robbie go?"
"No, dear," he said, and winced at the sound of his voice, "they won't allow robots at the visivox - but you can tell him all about it when you get home." He stumbled all over the last few words and looked away.
Gloria came back from town bubbling over with enthusiasm, for the visivox had been a gorgeous spectacle indeed.
She waited for her father to maneuver the jet-car into the sunken garage, "Wait till I tell Robbie, Daddy. He would have liked it like anything. -Especially when Francis Fran was backing away so-o-o quietly, and backed right into one of the Leopard-Men and had to run." She laughed again, "Daddy, are there really Leopard-Men on the Moon?"
"Probably not," said Weston absently. "It's just funny make-believe." He couldn't take much longer with the car. He'd have to face it.
Gloria ran across the lawn. "Robbie. -Robbie!"
Then she stopped suddenly at the sight of a beautiful collie which regarded her out of serious brown eyes as it wagged its tail on the porch.
"Oh, what a nice dog!" Gloria climbed the steps, approached cautiously and patted it. "Is it for me, Daddy?"
Her mother had joined them. "Yes, it is, Gloria. Isn't it nice - soft and furry. It's very gentle. It likes little girls."
"Can he play games?"
"Surely. He can do any number of tricks. Would you like to see some?"
"Right away. I want Robbie to see him, too. -Robbie!" She stopped, uncertainly, and frowned, "I'll bet he's just staying in his room because he's mad at me for not taking him to the visivox. You'll have to explain to him, Daddy. He might not believe me, but he knows if you say it, it's so."
Weston's lip grew tighter. He looked toward his wife but could not catch her eye.
Gloria turned precipitously and ran down the basement steps, shouting as she went, "Robbie- Come and see what Daddy and Mamma brought me. They brought me a dog, Robbie."
In a minute she had returned, a frightened little girl. "Mamma, Robbie isn't in his room. Where is he?" There was no answer and George Weston coughed and was suddenly extremely interested in an aimlessly drifting cloud. Gloria's voice quavered on the verge of tears, "Where's Robbie, Mamma?"
Mrs. Weston sat down and drew her daughter gently to her, "Don't feel bad, Gloria. Robbie has gone away, I think."
"Gone away? Where? Where's he gone away, Mamma?"
"No one knows, darling. He just walked away. We've looked and we've looked and we've looked for him, but we can't find him."
"You mean he'll never come back again?" Her eyes were round with horror.
"We may find him soon. We'll keep looking for him. And meanwhile you can play with your nice new doggie. Look at him! His name is Lightning and he can-"
But Gloria's eyelids had overflown, "I don't want the nasty dog - I want Robbie. I want you to find me Robbie." Her feelings became too deep for words, and she spluttered into a shrill wail.
Mrs. Weston glanced at her husband for help, but he merely shuffled his feet morosely and did not withdraw his ardent stare from the heavens, so she bent to the task of consolation, "Why do you cry, Gloria? Robbie was only a machine, just a nasty old machine. He wasn't alive at all."
"He was not no machine!" screamed Gloria, fiercely and ungrammatically. "He was a person just like you and me and he was my friend. I want him back. Oh, Mamma, I want him back."
Her mother groaned in defeat and left Gloria to her sorrow.
"Let her have her cry out," she told her husband. "Childish griefs are never lasting. In a few days, she'll forget that awful robot ever existed."
But time proved Mrs. Weston a bit too optimistic. To be sure, Gloria ceased crying, but she ceased smiling, too, and the passing days found her ever more silent and shadowy. Gradually, her attitude of passive unhappiness wore Mrs. Weston down and all that kept her from yielding was the impossibility of admitting defeat to her husband.
Then, one evening, she flounced into the living room, sat down, folded her arms and looked boiling mad.
Her husband stretched his neck in order to see her over his newspaper, "What now, Grace?"
"It's that child, George. I've had to send back the dog today. Gloria positively couldn't stand the sight of him, she said. She's driving me into a nervous breakdown."
Weston laid down the paper and a hopeful gleam entered his eye, "Maybe- Maybe we ought to get Robbie back. It might be done, you know. I can get in touch with-"
"No!" she replied, grimly. "I won't hear of it. We're not giving up that easily. My child shall not be brought up by a robot if it takes years to break her of it."
Weston picked up his paper again with a disappointed air. "A year of this will have me prematurely gray."
"You're a big help, George," was the frigid answer. "What Gloria needs is a change of environment. Of course she can't forget Robbie here. How can she when every tree and rock reminds her of him? It is really the silliest situation I have ever heard of. Imagine a child pining away for the loss of a robot."
"Well, stick to the point. What's the change in environment you're planning?"
"We're going to take her to New York."
"The city! In August! Say, do you know what New York is like in August? It's unbearable."
"Millions do bear it."
"They don't have a place like this to go to. If they didn't have to stay in New York, they wouldn't."
"Well, we have to. I say we're leaving now - or as soon as we can make the arrangements. In the city, Gloria will find sufficient interests and sufficient friends to perk her up and make her forget that machine."
"Oh, Lord," groaned the lesser half, "those frying pavements!"
"We have to," was the unshaken response. "Gloria has lost five pounds in the last month and my little girl's health is more important to me than your comfort."
"It's a pity you didn't think of your little girl's health before you deprived her of her pet robot," he muttered - but to himself.

Gloria displayed immediate signs of improvement when told of the impending trip to the city. She spoke little of it, but when she did, it was always with lively anticipation. Again, she began to smile and to eat with something of her former appetite.
Mrs. Weston hugged herself for joy and lost no opportunity to triumph over her still skeptical husband.
"You see, George, she helps with the packing like a little angel, and chatters away as if she hadn't a care in the world. It's just as I told you - all we need do is substitute other interests."
"Hmpph," was the skeptical response, "I hope so."
Preliminaries were gone through quickly. Arrangements were made for the preparation of their city home and a couple were engaged as housekeepers for the country home. When the day of the trip finally did come, Gloria was all but her old self again, and no mention of Robbie passed her lips at all.
In high good-humor the family took a taxi-gyro to the airport (Weston would have preferred using his own private 'gyro, but it was only a two-seater with no room for baggage) and entered the waiting liner.
"Come, Gloria," called Mrs. Weston. "I've saved you a seat near the window so you can watch the scenery."
Gloria trotted down the aisle cheerily, flattened her nose into a white oval against the thick clear glass, and watched with an intentness that increased as the sudden coughing of the motor drifted backward into the interior. She was too young to be frightened when the ground dropped away as if let through a trap-door and she herself suddenly became twice her usual weight, but not too young to be mightily interested. It wasn't until the ground had changed into a tiny patch-work quilt that she withdrew her nose, and faced her mother again.
"Will we soon be in the city, Mamma?" she asked, rubbing her chilled nose, and watching with interest as the patch of moisture which her breath had formed on the pane shrank slowly and vanished.
"In about half an hour, dear." Then, with just the faintest trace of anxiety, "Aren't you glad we're going? Don't you think you'll be very happy in the city with all the buildings and people and things to see? We'll go to the visivox every day and see shows and go to the circus and the beach and-"
"Yes, Mamma," was Gloria's unenthusiastic rejoinder. The liner passed over a bank of clouds at the moment, and Gloria was instantly absorbed in the usual spectacle of clouds underneath one. Then they were over clear sky again, and she turned to her mother with a sudden mysterious air of secret knowledge.
"I know why we're going to the city, Mamma."
"Do you?" Mrs. Weston was puzzled. "Why, dear?"
"You didn't tell me because you wanted it to be a surprise, but I know." For a moment, she was lost in admiration at her own acute penetration, and then she laughed gaily. "We're going to New York so we can find Robbie, aren't we? -With detectives."
The statement caught George Weston in the middle of a drink of water, with disastrous results. There was a sort of strangled gasp, a geyser of water, and then a bout of choking coughs. When all was over, he stood there, a red-faced, water-drenched and very, very annoyed person.
Mrs. Weston maintained her composure, but when Gloria repeated her question in a more anxious tone of voice, she found her temper rather bent.
"Maybe," she retorted, tartly. "Now sit and be still, for Heaven's sake."

New York City, 1998 A.D., was a paradise for the sightseer more than ever in its history. Gloria's parents realized this and made the most of it.
On direct orders from his wife, George Weston arranged to have his business take care of itself for a month or so, in order to be free to spend the time in what he, termed "dissipating Gloria to the verge of ruin." Like everything else Weston did, this was gone about in an efficient, thorough, and business-like way. Before the month had passed, nothing that could be done had not been done.
She was taken to the top of the half-mile tall Roosevelt Building, to gaze down in awe upon the jagged panorama of rooftops that blended far off in the fields of Long Island and the flatlands of New Jersey. They visited the zoos where Gloria stared in delicious fright at the "real live lion" (rather disappointed that the keepers fed him raw steaks, instead of human beings, as she had expected), and asked insistently and peremptorily to see "the whale."
The various museums came in for their share of attention, together with the parks and the beaches and the aquarium.
She was taken halfway up the Hudson in an excursion steamer fitted out in the archaism of the mad Twenties. She travelled into the stratosphere on an exhibition trip, where the sky turned deep purple and the stars came out and the misty earth below looked like a huge concave bowl. Down under the waters of the Long Island Sound she was taken in a glass-walled sub-sea vessel, where in a green and wavering world, quaint and curious sea-things ogled her and wiggled suddenly away.
On a more prosaic level, Mrs. Weston took her to the department stores where she could revel in another type of fairyland.
In fact, when the month had nearly sped, the Westons were convinced that everything conceivable had been done to take Gloria's mind once and for all off the departed Robbie - but they were not quite sure they had succeeded.
The fact remained that wherever Gloria went, she displayed the most absorbed and concentrated interest in such robots as happened to be present. No matter how exciting the spectacle before her, nor how novel to her girlish eyes, she turned away instantly if the corner of her eye caught a glimpse of metallic movement.
Mrs. Weston went out of her way to keep Gloria away from all robots.
And the matter was finally climaxed in the episode at the Museum of Science and Industry. The Museum had announced a special "children's program" in which exhibits of scientific witchery scaled down to the child mind were to be shown. The Westons, of course, placed it upon their list of "absolutely."
It was while the Westons were standing totally absorbed in the exploits of a powerful electro-magnet that Mrs. Weston suddenly became aware of the fact that Gloria was no longer with her. Initial panic gave way to calm decision and, enlisting the aid of three attendants, a careful search was begun.
Gloria, of course, was not one to wander aimlessly, however. For her age, she was an unusually determined and purposeful girl, quite full of the maternal genes in that respect. She had seen a huge sign on the third floor, which had said, "This Way to the Talking Robot" Having spelled it out to herself and having noticed that her parents did not seem to wish to move in the proper direction, she did the obvious thing. Waiting for an opportune moment of parental distraction, she calmly disengaged herself and followed the sign.

The Talking Robot was a tour de force, a thoroughly impractical device, possessing publicity value only. Once an hour, an escorted group stood before it and asked questions of the robot engineer in charge in careful whispers. Those the engineer decided were suitable for the robot's circuits were transmitted to the Talking Robot.
It was rather dull. It may be nice to know that the square of fourteen is one hundred ninety-six, that the temperature at the moment is 72 degrees Fahrenheit, and the air-pressure 30.02 inches of mercury, that the atomic weight of sodium is 23, but one doesn't really need a robot for that. One especially does not need an unwieldy, totally immobile mass of wires and coils spreading over twenty-five square yards.
Few people bothered to return for a second helping, but one girl in her middle teens sat quietly on a bench waiting for a third. She was the only one in the room when Gloria entered.
Gloria did not look at her. To her at the moment, another human being was but an inconsiderable item. She saved her attention for this large thing with the wheels. For a moment, she hesitated in dismay. It didn't look like any robot she had ever seen.
Cautiously and doubtfully she raised her treble voice; "Please, Mr. Robot, sir, are you the Talking Robot, sir?" She wasn't sure, but it seemed to her that a robot that actually talked was worth a great deal of politeness.
(The girl in her mid-teens allowed a look of intense concentration to cross her thin, plain face. She whipped out a small notebook and began writing in rapid pot-hooks.)
There was an oily whir of gears and a mechanically timbred voice boomed out in words that lacked accent and intonation, "I- am- the- robot- that- talks."
Gloria stared at it ruefully. It did talk, but the sound came from inside somewheres. There was no face to talk to. She said, "Can you help me, Mr. Robot, sir?"
The Talking Robot was designed to answer questions, and only such questions as it could answer had ever been put to it. It was quite confident of its ability, therefore, "I- can- help- you."
"Thank you, Mr. Robot, sir. Have you seen Robbie?"
"Who -is Robbie?"
"He's a robot, Mr. Robot, sir." She stretched to tip-toes. "He's about so high, Mr. Robot, sir, only higher, and he's very nice. He's got a head, you know. I mean you haven't, but he has, Mr. Robot, sir."
The Talking Robot had been left behind, "A- robot?"
"Yes, Mr. Robot, sir. A robot just like you, except he can't talk, of course, and- looks like a real person."
"A- robot- like- me?"
"Yes, Mr. Robot, sir."
To which the Talking Robot's only response was an erratic splutter and an occasional incoherent sound. The radical generalization offered it, i.e., its existence, not as a particular object, but as a member of a general group, was too much for it. Loyally, it tried to encompass the concept and half a dozen coils burnt out. Little warning signals were buzzing.
(The girl in her mid-teens left at that point. She had enough for her Physics-1 paper on "Practical Aspects of Robotics." This paper was Susan Calvin's first of many on the subject.)
Gloria stood waiting, with carefully concealed impatience, for the machine's answer when she heard the cry behind her of "There she is," and recognized that cry as her mother's.
"What are you doing here, you bad girl?" cried Mrs. Weston, anxiety dissolving at once into anger. "Do you know you frightened your mamma and daddy almost to death? Why did you run away?"
The robot engineer had also dashed in, tearing his hair, and demanding who of the gathering crowd had tampered with the machine. "Can't anybody read signs?" he yelled. "You're not allowed in here without an attendant."
Gloria raised her grieved voice over the din, "I only came to see the Talking Robot, Mamma. I thought he might know where Robbie was because they're both robots." And then, as the thought of Robbie was suddenly brought forcefully home to her, she burst into a sudden storm of tears, "And I got to find Robbie, Mamma. I got to."
Mrs. Weston strangled a cry, and said, "Oh, good Heavens. Come home, George. This is more than I can stand."
That evening, George Weston left for several hours, and the next morning, he approached his wife with something that looked suspiciously like smug complacence.
"I've got an idea, Grace."
"About what?" was the gloomy, uninterested query.
"About Gloria."
"You're not going to suggest buying back that robot?"
"No, of course not."
"Then go ahead. I might as well listen to you. Nothing I've done seems to have done any good."
"All right. Here's what I've been thinking. The whole trouble with Gloria is that she thinks of Robbie as a person and not as a machine. Naturally, she can't forget him. Now if we managed to convince her that Robbie was nothing more than a mess of steel and copper in the form of sheets and wires with electricity its juice of life, how long would her longings last? It's the psychological attack, if you see my point."
"How do you plan to do it?"
"Simple. Where do you suppose I went last night? I persuaded Robertson of U. S. Robots and Mechanical Men, Inc. to arrange for a complete tour of his premises tomorrow. The three of us will go, and by the time we're through, Gloria will have it drilled into her that a robot is not alive."
Mrs. Weston's eyes widened gradually and something glinted in her eyes that was quite like sudden admiration, "Why, George, that's a good idea."
And George Weston's vest buttons strained. "Only kind I have," he said.

Mr. Struthers was a conscientious General Manager and naturally inclined to be a bit talkative. The combination, therefore, resulted in a tour that was fully explained, perhaps even over-abundantly explained, at every step. However, Mrs. Weston was not bored. Indeed, she stopped him several times and begged him to repeat his statements in simpler language so that Gloria might understand. Under the influence of this appreciation of his narrative powers, Mr. Struthers expanded genially and became ever more communicative, if possible.
George Weston, himself, showed a gathering impatience.
"Pardon me, Struthers," he said, breaking into the middle of a lecture on the photo-electric cell, "haven't you a section of the factory where only robot labor is employed?"
"Eh? Oh, yes! Yes, indeed!" He smiled at Mrs. Weston. "A vicious circle in a way, robots creating more robots. Of course, we are not making a general practice out of it. For one thing, the unions would never let us. But we can turn out a very few robots using robot labor exclusively, merely as a sort of scientific experiment. You see," he tapped his pince-nez into one palm argumentatively, "what the labor unions don't realize - and I say this as a man who has always been very sympathetic with the labor movement in general - is that the advent of the robot, while involving some dislocation to begin with, will inevitably-"
"Yes, Struthers," said Weston, "but about that section of the factory you speak of - may we see it? It would be very interesting, I'm sure."
"Yes! Yes, of course!" Mr. Struthers replaced his pince-nez in one convulsive movement and gave vent to a soft cough of discomfiture. "Follow me, please."
He was comparatively quiet while leading the three through a long corridor and down a flight of stairs. Then, when they had entered a large well-lit room that buzzed with metallic activity, the sluices opened and the flood of explanation poured forth again.
"There you are!" he said with pride in his voice. "Robots only! Five men act as overseers and they don't even stay in this room. In five years, that is, since we began this project, not a single accident has occurred. Of course, the robots here assembled are comparatively simple, but..."
The General Manager's voice had long died to a rather soothing murmur in Gloria's ears. The whole trip seemed rather dull and pointless to her, though there were many robots in sight. None were even remotely like Robbie, though, and she surveyed them with open contempt.
In this room, there weren't any people at all, she noticed. Then her eyes fell upon six or seven robots busily engaged at a round table halfway across the room. They widened in incredulous surprise. It was a big room. She couldn't see for sure, but one of the robots looked like- looked like- it was!
"Robbie!" Her shriek pierced the air, and one of the robots about the table faltered and dropped the tool he was holding. Gloria went almost mad with joy. Squeezing through the railing before either parent could stop her, she dropped lightly to the floor a few feet below, and ran toward her Robbie, arms waving and hair flying.
And the three horrified adults, as they stood frozen in their tracks, saw what the excited little girl did not see, -a huge, lumbering tractor bearing blindly down upon its appointed track.
It took split-seconds for Weston to come to his senses, and those split-seconds meant everything, for Gloria could not be overtaken. Although Weston vaulted the railing in a wild attempt, it was obviously hopeless. Mr. Struthers signalled wildly to the overseers to stop the tractor, but the overseers were only human and it took time to act.
It was only Robbie that acted immediately and with precision.
With metal legs eating up the space between himself and his little mistress he charged down from the opposite direction. Everything then happened at once. With one sweep of an arm, Robbie snatched up Gloria, slackening his speed not one iota, and, consequently, knocking every breath of air out of her. Weston, not quite comprehending all that was happening, felt, rather than saw, Robbie brush past him, and came to a sudden bewildered halt. The tractor intersected Gloria's path half a second after Robbie had, rolled on ten feet further and came to a grinding, long drawn-out stop.
Gloria regained her breath, submitted to a series of passionate hugs on the part of both her parents and turned eagerly toward Robbie. As far as she was concerned, nothing had happened except that she had found her friend.
But Mrs. Weston's expression had changed from one of relief to one of dark suspicion. She turned to her husband, and, despite her disheveled and undignified appearance, managed to look quite formidable, "You engineered this, didn't you?
George Weston swabbed at a hot forehead with his handkerchief. His hand was unsteady, and his lips could curve only into a tremulous and exceedingly weak smile.
Mrs. Weston pursued the thought, "Robbie wasn't designed for engineering or construction work. He couldn't be of any use to them. You had him placed there deliberately so that Gloria would find him. You know you did."
"Well, I did," said Weston. "But, Grace, how was I to know the reunion would be so violent? And Robbie has saved her life; you'll have to admit that. You can't send him away again."
Grace Weston considered. She turned toward Gloria and Robbie and watched them abstractedly for a moment. Gloria had a grip about the robot's neck that would have asphyxiated any creature but one of metal, and was prattling nonsense in half-hysterical frenzy. Robbie's chromesteel arms (capable of bending a bar of steel two inches in diameter into a pretzel) wound about the little girl gently and lovingly, and his eyes glowed a deep, deep red.
"Well," said Mrs. Weston, at last, "I guess he can stay with us until he rusts."

---

Susan Calvin shrugged her shoulders, "Of course, he didn't. That was 1998. By 2002, we had invented the mobile speaking robot which, of course, made all the non-speaking models out of date, and which seemed to be the final straw as far as the non-robot elements were concerned. Most of the world governments banned robot use on Earth for any purpose other than scientific research between 2003 and 2007."
"So that Gloria had to give up Robbie eventually?"
"I'm afraid so. I imagine, however, that it was easier for her at the age of fifteen than at eight. Still, it was a stupid and unnecessary attitude on the part of humanity. U. S. Robots hit its low point, financially, just about the time I joined them in 2007. At first, I thought my job might come to a sudden end in a matter of months, but then we simply developed the extra-Terrestrial market."
"And then you were set, of course."
"Not quite. We began by trying to adapt the models we had on hand. Those first speaking models, for instance. They were about twelve feet high, very clumsy and not much good. We sent them out to Mercury to help build the mining station there, but that failed."
I looked up in surprise, "It did? Why, Mercury Mines is a multi-billion dollar concern."
"It is now, but it was a second attempt that succeeded. It you want to know about that, young man, I'd advise you to look up Gregory Powell. He and Michael Donovan handled our most difficult cases in the teens and twenties. I haven't heard from Donovan in years, but Powell is living right here in New York. He's a grandfather now, which is a thought difficult to get used to. I can only think of him as a rather young man. Of course, I was younger, too."
I tried to keep her talking, "If you would give me the bare bones, Dr. Calvin, I can have Mr. Powell fill it in afterward." (And this was exactly what I later did.)
She spread her thin hands out upon the desk and looked at them. "There are two or three," she said, "that I know a little about."
"Start with Mercury," I suggested.
"Well, I think it was in 2015 that the Second Mercury Expedition was sent out. It was exploratory and financed in part by U. S. Robots and in part by Solar Minerals. It consisted of a new-type robot, still experimental; Gregory Powell, Michael Donovan-'

Runaround

IT WAS ONE OF GREGORY POWELL'S FAVORITE platitudes that nothing was to be gained from excitement, so when Mike Donovan came leaping down the stairs toward him, red hair matted with perspiration, Powell frowned.
"What's wrong?" he said. "Break a fingernail?"
"Yaaaah," snarled Donovan, feverishly. "What have you been doing in the sublevels all day?" He took a deep breath and blurted out, "Speedy never returned."
Powell's eyes widened momentarily and he stopped on the stairs; then he recovered and resumed his upward steps. He didn't speak until he reached the head of the flight, and then:
"You sent him after the selenium?"
"Yes."
"And how long has he been out?"
"Five hours now."
Silence! This was a devil of a situation. Here they were, on Mercury exactly twelve hours-and already up to the eyebrows in the worst sort of trouble. Mercury had long been the jinx world of the System, but this was drawing it rather strong - even for a jinx.
Powell said, "Start at the beginning, and let's get this straight."
They were in the radio room now - with its already subtly antiquated equipment, untouched for the ten years previous to their arrival. Even ten years, technologically speaking, meant so much. Compare Speedy with the type of robot they must have had back in 2005. But then, advances in robotics these days were tremendous. Powell touched a still gleaming metal surface gingerly. The air of disuse that touched everything about the room - and the entire Station - was infinitely depressing.
Donovan must have felt it. He began: "I tried to locate him by radio, but it was no go. Radio isn't any good on the Mercury Sunside - not past two miles, anyway. That's one of the reasons the First Expedition failed. And we can't put up the ultrawave equipment for weeks yet -"
"Skip all that. What did you get?"
"I located the unorganized body signal in the short wave. It was no good for anything except his position. I kept track of him that way for two hours and plotted the results on the map."
There was a yellowed square of parchment in his hip pocket - a relic of the unsuccessful First Expedition - and he slapped it down on the desk with vicious force, spreading it flat with the palm of his hand. Powell, hands clasped across his chest, watched it at long range.
Donovan's pencil pointed nervously. "The red cross is the selenium pool. You marked it yourself."
"Which one is it?" interrupted Powell. "There were three that MacDougal located for us before he left."
"I sent Speedy to the nearest, naturally. Seventeen miles away. But what difference does that make?" There was tension in his voice. "There are the penciled dots that mark Speedy's position."
And for the first time Powell's artificial aplomb was shaken and his hands shot forward for the map.
"Are you serious? This is impossible."
"There it is," growled Donovan.
The little dots that marked the position formed a rough circle about the red cross of the selenium pool. And Powell's fingers went to his brown mustache, the unfailing signal of anxiety.
Donovan added: "In the two hours I checked on him, he circled that damned pool four times. It seems likely to me that he'll keep that up forever. Do you realize the position we're in?"
Powell looked up shortly, and said nothing. Oh, yes, he realized the position they were in. It worked itself out as simply as a syllogism. The photo-cell banks that alone stood between the full power of Mercury's monstrous sun and themselves were shot to hell. 
The only thing that could save them was selenium. The only thing that could get the selenium was Speedy. If Speedy didn't come back, no selenium. No selenium, no photo-cell banks. No photo-banks - well, death by slow broiling is one of the more unpleasant ways of being done in.
Donovan rubbed his red mop of hair savagely and expressed himself with bitterness. "We'll be the laughingstock of the System, Greg. How can everything have gone so wrong so soon? The great team of Powell and Donovan is sent out to Mercury to report on the advisability of reopening the Sunside Mining Station with modern techniques and robots and we ruin everything the first day. A purely routine job, too. We'll never live it down."
"We won't have to, perhaps," replied Powell, quietly. "If we don't do something quickly, living anything down - or even just plain living - will be out of the question."
"Don't be stupid! If you feel funny about it, Greg, I don't. It was criminal, sending us out here with only one robot. And it was your bright idea that we could handle the photo-cell banks ourselves."
"Now you're being unfair. It was a mutual decision and you know it. All we needed was a kilogram of selenium, a Stillhead Dielectrode Plate and about three hours' time and there are pools of pure selenium all over Sunside. MacDougal's spectroreflector spotted three for us in five minutes, didn't it? What the devil! We couldn't have waited for next conjunction."
"Well, what are we going to do? Powell, you've got an idea. I know you have, or you wouldn't be so calm. You're no more a hero than I am. Go on, spill it!"
"We can't go after Speedy ourselves, Mike- not on the Sunside. Even the new insosuits aren't good for more than twenty minutes in direct sunlight. But you know the old saying, 'Set a robot to catch a robot' Look, Mike, maybe things aren't so bad. We've got six robots down in the sublevels, that we may be able to use, if they work. If they work."
There was a glint of sudden hope in Donovan's eyes. "You mean six robots from the First Expedition. Are you sure? They may be subrobotic machines. Ten years is a long time as far as robot-types are concerned, you know."
"No, they're robots. I've spent all day with them and I know. They've got positronic brains: primitive, of course." He placed the map in his pocket. "Let's go down."
The robots were on the lowest sublevel - all six of them surrounded by musty packing cases of uncertain content. They were large, extremely so, and even though they were in a sitting position on the floor, legs straddled out before them, their heads were a good seven feet in the air.
Donovan whistled. "Look at the size of them, will you? The chests must be ten feet around."
"That's because they're supplied with the old McGuffy gears. I've been over the insides - crummiest set you've ever seen."
"Have you powered them yet?"
"No. There wasn't any reason to. I don't think there's anything wrong with them. Even the diaphragm is in reasonable order. They might talk."
He had unscrewed the chest plate of the nearest as he spoke, inserted the two-inch sphere that contained the tiny spark of atomic energy that was a robot's life. There was difficulty in fitting it, but he managed, and then screwed the plate back on again in laborious fashion. The radio controls of more modern models had not been heard of ten years earlier. And then to the other five.
Donovan said uneasily, "They haven't moved."
"No orders to do so," replied Powell, succinctly. He went back to the first in the line and struck him on the chest. "You! Do you hear me?"
The monster's head bent slowly and the eyes fixed themselves on Powell. Then, in a harsh, squawking voice - like that of a medieval phonograph, he grated, "Yes, Master!"
Powell grinned humorlessly at Donovan. "Did you get that? Those were the days of the first talking robots when it looked as if the use of robots on Earth would be banned. The makers were fighting that and they built good, healthy slave complexes into the damned machines."
"It didn't help them," muttered Donovan.
"No, it didn't, but they sure tried." He turned once more to the robot. "Get up!"
The robot towered upward slowly and Donovan's head craned and his puckered lips whistled.
Powell said: "Can you go out upon the surface? In the light?"
There was consideration while the robot's slow brain worked. Then, "Yes, Master."
"Good. Do you know what a mile is?"
Another consideration, and another glow answer. "Yes, Master."
"We will take you up to the surface then, and indicate a direction. You will go about seventeen miles, and somewhere in that general region you will meet- another robot, smaller than yourself. You understand so far?"
"Yes, Master."
"You will find this robot and order him to return. If he does not wish to, you are to bring him back by force."
Donovan clutched at Powell's sleeve. "Why not send him for the selenium direct?"
"Because I want Speedy back, nitwit. I want to find out what's wrong with him." And to the robot, "All right, you, follow me."
The robot remained motionless and his voice rumbled: "Pardon, Master, but I cannot. You must mount first." His clumsy arms had come together with a thwack, blunt fingers interlacing.
Powell stared and then pinched at his mustache. "Uh... oh!"
Donovan's eyes bulged. "We've got to ride him? Like a horse?"
"I guess that's the idea. I don't know why, though. I can't see- Yes, I do. I told you they were playing up robot-safety in those days. Evidently, they were going to sell the notion of safety by not allowing them to move about, without a mahout on their shoulders all the time. What do we do now?"
"That's what I've been thinking," muttered Donovan. "We can't go out on the surface, with a robot or without. Oh, for the love of Pete" - and he snapped his fingers twice. He grew excited. "Give me that map you've got. I haven't studied it for two hours for nothing. This is a Mining Station. What's wrong with using the tunnels?"
The Mining Station was a black circle on the map, and the light dotted lines that were tunnels stretched out about it in spiderweb fashion.
Donovan studied the list of symbols at the bottom of the map. "Look," he said, "the small black dots are openings to the surface, and here's one maybe three miles away from the selenium pool. There's a number here - you'd think they'd write larger - 13a. If the robots know their way around here-"
Powell shot the question and received the dull "Yes, Master," in reply. "Get your insosuit," he said with satisfaction.
It was the first time either had worn the insosuits - which marked one time more than either had expected to upon their arrival the day before - and they tested their limb movements uncomfortably.
The insosuit was far bulkier and far uglier than the regulation spacesuit; but withal considerably lighter, due to the fact that they were entirely nonmetallic in composition. Composed of heat-resistant plastic and chemically treated cork layers, and equipped with a desiccating unit to keep the air bone-dry, the insosuits could withstand the full glare of Mercury's sun for twenty minutes. Five to ten minutes more, as well, without actually killing the occupant.
And still the robot's hands formed the stirrup, nor did he betray the slightest atom of surprise at the grotesque figure into which Powell had been converted.
Powell's radio-harshened voice boomed out: "Are you ready to take us to Exit 13a?"
"Yes, Master."
Good, thought Powell; they might lack radio control but at least they were fitted for radio reception. "Mount one or the other, Mike," he said to Donovan.
He placed a foot in the improvised stirrup and swung upward. He found the seat comfortable; there was the humped back of the robot, evidently shaped for the purpose, a shallow groove along each shoulder for the thighs and two elongated "ears" whose purpose now seemed obvious.
Powell seized the ears and twisted the head. His mount turned ponderously. "Lead on, Macduff." But he did not feel at all lighthearted.
The gigantic robots moved slowly, with mechanical precision, through the doorway that cleared their heads by a scant foot, so that the two men had to duck hurriedly, along a narrow corridor in which their unhurried footsteps boomed monotonously and into the, air lock.
The long, airless tunnel that stretched to a pinpoint before them brought home forcefully to Powell the exact magnitude of the task accomplished by the First Expedition, with their crude robots and their start-from-scratch necessities. They might have been a failure, but their failure was a good deal better than the usual run of the System's successes.
The robots plodded onward with a pace that never varied and with footsteps that never lengthened.
Powell said: "Notice that these tunnels are blazing with lights and that the temperature is Earth-normal. It's probably been like this all the ten years that this place has remained empty."
"How's that?"
"Cheap energy; cheapest in the System. Sunpower, you know, and on Mercury's Sunside, sunpower is something. That's why the Station was built in the sunlight rather than in the shadow of a mountain. It's really a huge energy converter. The heat is turned into electricity, light, mechanical work and what have you; so that energy is supplied and the Station is cooled in a simultaneous process."
"Look," said Donovan. "This is all very educational, but would you mind changing the subject? It so happens that this conversion of energy that you talk about is carried on by the photo-cell banks mainly - and that is a tender subject with me at the moment."
Powell grunted vaguely, and when Donovan broke the resulting silence, it was to change the subject completely. "Listen, Greg. What the devil's wrong with Speedy, anyway? I can't understand it."
It's not easy to shrug shoulders in an insosuit, but Powell tried it. "I don't know, Mike. You know he's perfectly adapted to a Mercurian environment. Heat doesn't mean anything to him and he's built for the light gravity and the broken ground. He's foolproof-or, at least, he should be."
Silence fell. This time, silence that lasted.
"Master," said the robot, "we are here."
"Eh?" Powell snapped out of a semidrowse. "Well, get us out of here - out to the surface."
They found themselves in a tiny substation, empty, airless, ruined. Donovan had inspected a jagged hole in the upper reaches of one of the walls by the light of his pocket flash.
"Meteorite, do you suppose?" he had asked.
Powell shrugged. "To hell with that. It doesn't matter. Let's get out."
A towering cliff of a black, basaltic rock cut off the sunlight, and the deep night shadow of an airless world surrounded them. Before them, the shadow reached out and ended in knife-edge abruptness into an all-but-unbearable blaze of white light, that glittered from myriad crystals along a rocky ground.
"Space!" gasped Donovan. "It looks like snow." And it did.
Powell's eyes swept the jagged glitter of Mercury to the horizon and winced at the gorgeous brilliance.
"This must be an unusual area," he said. "The general albedo of Mercury is low and most of the soil is gray pumice. Something like the Moon, you know. Beautiful, isn't it?"
He was thankful for the light filters in their visiplates. Beautiful or not, a look at the sunlight through straight glass would have blinded them inside of half a minute.
Donovan was looking at the spring thermometer on his wrist. "Holy smokes, the temperature is eighty centigrade!"
Powell checked his own and said: "Um-m-m. A little high. Atmosphere, you know."
"On Mercury? Are you nuts?"
"Mercury isn't really airless," explained Powell, in absentminded fashion. He was adjusting the binocular attachments to his visiplate, and the bloated fingers of the insosuit were clumsy at it. "There is a thin exhalation that clings to its surface - vapors of the more volatile elements and compounds that are heavy enough for Mercurian gravity to retain. You know: selenium, iodine, mercury, gallium, potassium, bismuth, volatile oxides. The vapors sweep into the shadows and condense, giving up heat. It's a sort of gigantic still. In fact, if you use your flash, you'll probably find that the side of the cliff is covered with, say, hoar-sulphur, or maybe quicksilver dew.
"It doesn't matter, though. Our suits can stand a measly eighty indefinitely."
Powell had adjusted the binocular attachments, so that he seemed as eye-stalked as a snail.
Donovan watched tensely. "See anything?"
The other did not answer immediately, and when he did, his voice was anxious and thoughtful. "There's a dark spot on the horizon that might be the selenium pool. It's in the right place. But I don't see Speedy."
Powell clambered upward in an instinctive striving for better view, till he was standing in unsteady fashion upon his robot's shoulders. Legs straddled wide, eyes straining, he said: "I think... I think- Yes, it's definitely he. He's coming this way."
Donovan followed the pointing flnger. He had no binoculars, but there was a tiny moving dot, black against the blazing brilliance of the crystalline ground.
"I see him," he yelled. "Let's get going!"
Powell had hopped down into a sitting position on the robot again, and his suited hand slapped against the Gargantuan's barrel chest. "Get going!"
"Giddy-ap," yelled Donovan, and thumped his heels, spur fashion.
The robots started off, the regular thudding of their footsteps silent in the airlessness, for the nonmetallic fabric of the insosuits did not transmit sound. There was only a rhythmic vibration just below the border of actual hearing.
"Faster," yelled Donovan. The rhythm did not change.
"No use," cried Powell, in reply. "These junk heaps are only geared to one speed. Do you think they're equipped with selective flexors?"
They had burst through the shadow, and the sunlight came down in a white-hot wash and poured liquidly about them.
Donovan ducked involuntarily. "Wow! Is it imagination or do I feel heat?"
"You'll feel more presently," was the grim reply. "Keep your eye on Speedy."
Robot SPD 13 was near enough to be seen in detail now. His graceful, streamlined body threw out blazing highlights as he loped with easy speed across the broken ground. His name was derived from his serial initials, of course, but it was apt, nevertheless, for the SPD models were among the fastest robots turned out by the United States Robot & Mechanical Men Corp.
"Hey, Speedy," howled Donovan, and waved a frantic hand.
"Speedy!" shouted Powell. "Come here!"
The distance between the men and the errant robot was being cut down momentarily - more by the efforts of Speedy than the slow plodding of the fifty-year-old antique mounts of Donovan and Powell.
They were close enough now to notice that Speedy's gait included a peculiar rolling stagger, a noticeable side-to-side lurch- and then, as Powell waved his hand again and sent maximum juice into his compact head-set radio sender, in preparation for another shout, Speedy looked up and saw them.
Speedy hopped to a halt and remained standing for a moment with just a tiny, unsteady weave, as though he were swaying in a light wind.
Powell yelled: "All right, Speedy. Come here, boy."
Whereupon Speedy's robot voice sounded in Powell's ear. phones for the first time.
It said: "Hot dog, let's play games. You catch me and I catch you; no love can cut our knife in two. For I'm Little Buttercup, sweet Little Buttercup. Whoops!" Turning on his heel, he sped off in the direction from which he had come, with a speed and fury that kicked up gouts of baked dust.
And his last words as he receded into the distance were, "There grew a little flower 'neath a great oak tree," followed by a curious metallic clicking that might have been a robotic equivalent of a hiccup.
Donovan said weakly: "Where did he pick up the Gilbert and Sullivan? Say, Greg, he... he's drunk or something."
"If you hadn't told me," was the bitter response, "I'd never realize it. Let's get back to the cliff. I'm roasting."
It was Powell who broke the desperate silence. "In the first place," he said, "Speedy isn't drunk - not in the human sense - because he's a robot, and robots don't get drunk. However, there's something wrong with him which is the robotic equivalent of drunkenness"
"To me, he's drunk," stated Donovan, emphatically, "and all I know is that he thinks we're playing games. And we're not. It's a matter of life and very gruesome death."
"All right. Don't hurry me. A robot's only a robot. Once we find out what's wrong with him, we can fix it and go on."
"Once," said Donovan, sourly.
Powell ignored him. "Speedy is perfectly adapted to normal Mercurian environment. But this region" -and his arm swept wide- "is definitely abnormal. There's our clue. Now where do these crystals come from? They might have formed from a slowly cooling liquid; but where would you get liquid so hot that it would cool in Mercury's sun?"
"Volcanic action," suggested Donovan, instantly, and Powell's body tensed.
"Out of the mouths of sucklings ," he said in a small, strange voice and remained very still for five minutes.
Then, he said, "Listen, Mike, what did you say to Speedy when you sent him after the selenium?"
Donovan was taken aback. "Well damn it- I don't know. I just told him to get it."
"Yes, I know. But how? Try to remember the exact words."
"I said... uh... I said: 'Speedy, we need some selenium. You can get it such-and-such a place. Go get it' That's all. What more did you want me to say?"
"You didn't put any urgency into the order, did you?"
"What for? It was pure routine."
Powell sighed. "Well, it can't be helped now - but we're in a fine fix." He had dismounted from his robot, and was sitting, back against the cliff. Donovan joined him and they linked arms: In the distance the burning sunlight seemed to wait cat-and-mouse for them, and just next them, the two giant robots were invisible but for the dull red of their photoelectric eyes that stared down at them, unblinking, unwavering and unconcerned.
Unconcerned! As was all this poisonous Mercury, as large in jinx as it was small in size.
Powell's radio voice was tense in Donovan's ear: "Now, look, let's start with the three fundamental Rules of Robotics - the three rules that are built most deeply into a robot's positronic brain." In the darkness, his gloved fingers ticked off each point.
"We have: One, a robot may not injure a human being, or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm."
"Right!"
"Two," continued Powell, "a robot must obey the orders given it by human beings except where such orders would conflict with the First Law."
"Right"
"And three, a robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does not conflict with the First or Second Laws."
"Right! Now where are we?"
"Exactly at the explanation. The conflict between the various rules is ironed out by the different positronic potentials in the brain. We'll say that a robot is walking into danger and knows it. The automatic potential that Rule 3 sets up turns him back. But suppose you order him to walk into that danger. In that case, Rule 2 sets up a counterpotential higher than the previous one and the robot follows orders at the risk of existence."
"Well, I know that. What about it?"
"Let's take Speedy's case. Speedy is one of the latest models, extremely specialized, and as expensive as a battleship. It's not a thing to be lightly destroyed"
"So?"
"So Rule 3 has been strengthened - that was specifically mentioned, by the way, in the advance notices on the SPD models - so that his allergy to danger is unusually high. At the same time, when you sent him out after the selenium, you gave him his order casually and without special emphasis, so that the Rule 2 potential set-up was rather weak. Now, hold on; I'm just stating facts."
"All right, go ahead. I think I get it."
"You see how it works, don't you? There's some sort of danger centering at the selenium pool. It increases as he approaches, and at a certain distance from it the Rule 3 potential, unusually high to start with, exactly balances the Rule 2 potential, unusually low to start with."
Donovan rose to his feet in excitement. " And it strikes an equilibrium. I see. Rule 3 drives him back and Rule 2 drives him forward-"
"So he follows a circle around the selenium pool, staying on the locus of all points of potential equilibrium. And unless we do something about it, he'll stay on that circle forever, giving us the good old runaround." Then, more thoughtfully: "And that, by the way, is what makes him drunk. At potential equilibrium, half the positronic paths of his brain are out of kilter. I'm not a robot specialist, but that seems obvious. Probably he's lost control of just those parts of his voluntary mechanism that a human drunk has. Ve-e-ery pretty."
"But what's the danger? If we knew what he was running from-"
"You suggested it. Volcanic action. Somewhere right above the selenium pool is a seepage of gas from the bowels of Mercury. Sulphur dioxide, carbon dioxide - and carbon monoxide. Lots of it and at this temperature."
Donovan gulped audibly. "Carbon monoxide plus iron gives the volatile iron carbonyl."
"And a robot," added Powell, "is essentially iron." Then, grimly: "There's nothing like deduction. We've determined everything about our problem but the solution. We can't get the selenium ourselves. It's still too far. We can't send these robot horses, because they can't go themselves, and they can't carry us fast enough to keep us from crisping. And we can't catch Speedy, because the dope thinks we're playing games, and he can run sixty miles to our four."
"If one of us goes," began Donovan, tentatively, "and comes back cooked, there'll still be the other."
"Yes," came the sarcastic reply, "it would be a most tender sacrifice - except that a person would be in no condition to give orders before he ever reached the pool, and I don't think the robots would ever turn back to the cliff without orders. Figure it out! We're two or three miles from the pool - call it two - the robot travels at four miles an hour; and we can last twenty minutes in our suits. It isn't only the heat, remember. Solar radiation out here in the ultraviolet and below is poison."
"Um-m-m," said Donovan, "ten minutes short."
"As good as an eternity. And another thing. In order for Rule 3 potential to have stopped Speedy where it did, there must be an appreciable amount of carbon monoxide in the metal-vapor atmosphere - and there must be an appreciable corrosive action therefore. He's been out hours now - and how do we know when a knee joint, for instance, won't be thrown out of kilter and keel him over. It's not only a question of thinking - we've got to think fast!"
Deep, dark, dank, dismal silence!
Donovan broke it, voice trembling in an effort to keep itself emotionless. He said: "As long as we can't increase Rule 2 potential by giving further orders, how about working the other way? If we increase the danger, we increase Rule 3 potential and drive him backward."
Powell's visiplate had turned toward him in a silent question.
"You see," came the cautious explanation, "all we need to do to drive him out of his rut is to increase the concentration of carbon monoxide in his vicinity. Well, back at the Station there's a complete analytical laboratory."
"Naturally," assented Powell. "It's a Mining Station."
"All right. There must be pounds of oxalic acid for calcium precipitations."
"Holy space! Mike, you're a genius."
"So-so," admitted Donovan, modestly. "It's just a case of remembering that oxalic acid on heating decomposes into carbon dioxide, water, and good old carbon monoxide. College chem, you know."
Powell was on his feet and had attracted the attention of one of the monster robots by the simple expedient of pounding the machine's thigh.
"Hey," he shouted, "can you throw?"
"Master?"
"Never mind." Powell damned the robot's molasses-slow brain. He scrabbled up a jagged brick-size rock. "take this," he said, "and hit the patch of bluish crystals just across the crooked fissure. You see it?"
Donovan pulled at his shoulder. "Too far, Greg. It's almost half a mile off."
"Quiet," replied Powell. "It's a case of Mercurian gravity and a steel throwing arm. Watch, will you?"
The robot's eyes were measuring the distance with machinely accurate stereoscopy. His arm adjusted itself to the weight of the missile and drew back. In the darkness, the robot's motions went unseen, but there was a sudden thumping sound as he shifted his weight, and seconds later the rock flew blackly into the sunlight. There was no air resistance to slow it down, nor wind to turn it aside - and when it hit the ground it threw up crystals precisely in the center of the "blue patch."
Powell yelled happily and shouted, "Let's go back after the oxalic acid, Mike."
And as they plunged into the ruined substation on the way back to the tunnels, Donovan said grimly: "Speedy's been hanging about on this side of the selenium pool, ever since we chased after him. Did you see him?"
"Yes."
"I guess he wants to play games. Well, we'll play him games!"

They were back hours later, with three-liter jars of the white chemical and a pair of long faces. The photo-cell banks were deteriorating more rapidly than had seemed likely. The two steered their robots into the sunlight and toward the waiting Speedy in silence and with grim purpose.
Speedy galloped slowly toward them. "Here we are again. Whee! I've made a little list, the piano organist; all people who eat peppermint and puff it in your face."
"We'll puff something in your face," muttered Donovan. "He's limping, Greg."
"I noticed that," came the low, worried response. "The monoxide'll get him yet, if we don't hurry."
They were approaching cautiously now, almost sidling, to refrain from setting off the thoroughly irrational robot. Powell was too far off to tell, of course, but even already he could have sworn the crack-brained Speedy was setting himself for a spring.
"Let her go," he gasped. "Count three! One- two-"
Two steel arms drew back and snapped forward simultaneously and two glass jars whirled forward in towering parallel arcs, gleaming like diamonds in the impossible sun. And in a pair of soundless puffs, they hit the ground behind Speedy in crashes that sent the oxalic acid flying like dust.
In the full heat of Mercury's sun, Powell knew it was fizzing like soda water.
Speedy turned to stare, then backed away from it slowly - and as slowly gathered speed. In fifteen seconds, he was leaping directly toward the two humans in an unsteady canter.
Powell did not get Speedy's words just then, though he heard something that resembled, "Lover's professions when uttered in Hessians."
He turned away. "Back to the cliff, Mike. He's out of the rut and he'll be taking orders now. I'm getting hot."
They jogged toward the shadow at the slow monotonous pace of their mounts, and it was not until they had entered it and felt the sudden coolness settle softly about them that Donovan looked back. "Greg!"
Powell looked and almost shrieked. Speedy was moving slowly now -so slowly- and in the wrong direction. He was drifting; drifting back into his rut; and he was picking up speed. He looked dreadfully close, and dreadfully unreachable, in the binoculars.
Donovan shouted wildly, "After him!" and thumped his robot into its pace, but Powell called him back.
"You won't catch him, Mike - it's no use." He fidgeted on his robot's shoulders and clenched his fist in tight impotence. "Why the devil do I see these things five seconds after it's all over? Mike, we've wasted hours."
"We need more oxalic acid," declared Donovan, stolidly. "The concentration wasn't high enough."
"Seven tons of it wouldn't have been enough - and we haven't the hours to spare to get it, even if it were, with the monoxide chewing him away. Don't you see what it is, Mike?"
And Donovan said flatly, "No."
"We were only establishing new equilibriums. When we create new monoxide and increase Rule 3 potential, he moves backward till he's in balance again - and when the monoxide drifted away, he moved forward, and again there was balance."
Powell's voice sounded thoroughly wretched. "It's the same old runaround. We can push at Rule 2 and pull at Rule 3 and we can't get anywhere - we can only change the position of balance. We've got to get outside both rules." And then he pushed his robot closer to Donovan's so that they were sitting face to face, dim shadows in the darkness, and he whispered, "Mike!"
"Is it the finish?"-dully. "I suppose we go back to the Station, wait for the banks to fold, shake hands, take cyanide, and go out like gentlemen." He laughed shortly.
"Mike," repeated Powell earnestly, "we've got to get Speedy."
"I know."
"Mike," once more, and Powell hesitated before continuing. "There's always Rule 1. I thought of it -earlier- but it's desperate."
Donovan looked up and his voice livened. "We're desperate."
"All right. According to Rule 1, a robot can't see a human come to harm because of his own inaction. Two and 3 can't stand against it. They can't, Mike."
"Even when the robot is half cra- Well, he's drunk. You know he is."
"It's the chances you take."
"Cut it. What are you going to do?"
"I'm going out there now and see what Rule 1 will do. If it won't break the balance, then what the devil - it's either now or three-four days from now."
"Hold on, Greg. There are human rules of behavior, too. You don't go out there just like that. Figure out a lottery, and give me my chance."
"All right. First to get the cube of fourteen goes." And almost immediately, "Twenty-seven forty-four!"
Donovan felt his robot stagger at a sudden push by Powell's mount and then Powell was off into the sunlight. Donovan opened his mouth to shout, and then clicked it shut. Of course, the damn fool had worked out the cube of fourteen in advance, and on purpose. Just like him.

The sun was hotter than ever and Powell felt a maddening itch in the small of his back. Imagination, probably, or perhaps hard radiation beginning to tell even through the insosuit.
Speedy was watching him, without a word of Gilbert and Sullivan gibberish as greeting. Thank God for that! But he daren't get too close.
He was three hundred yards away when Speedy began backing, a step at a time, cautiously - and Powell stopped. He jumped from his robot's shoulders and landed on the crystalline ground with a light thump and a flying of jagged fragments.
He proceeded on foot, the ground gritty and slippery to his steps, the low gravity causing him difficulty. The soles of his feet tickled with warmth. He cast one glance over his shoulder at the blackness of the cliff's shadow and realized that he had come too far to return - either by himself or by the help of his antique robot. It was Speedy or nothing now, and the knowledge of that constricted his chest.
Far enough! He stopped.
"Speedy," he called. "Speedy!"
The sleek, modern robot ahead of him hesitated and halted his backward steps, then resumed them.
Powell tried to put a note of pleading into his voice, and found it didn't take much acting. "Speedy, I've got to get back to the shadow or the sun'll get me. It's life or death, Speedy. I need you."
Speedy took one step forward and stopped. He spoke, but at the sound Powell groaned, for it was, "When you're lying awake with a dismal headache and repose is tabooed-" It trailed off there, and Powell took time out for some reason to murmur, "Iolanthe."
It was roasting hot! He caught a movement out of the corner of his eye, and whirled dizzily; then stared in utter astonishment, for the monstrous robot on which he had ridden was moving - moving toward him, and without a rider.
He was talking: "Pardon, Master. I must not move without a Master upon me, but you are in danger."
Of course, Rule 1 potential above everything. But he didn't want that clumsy antique; he wanted Speedy. He walked away and motioned frantically: "I order you to stay away. I order you to stop!"
It was quite useless. You could not beat Rule 1 potential. The robot said stupidly, "You are in danger, Master."
Powell looked about him desperately. He couldn't see clearly. His brain was in a heated whirl; his breath scorched when he breathed, and the ground all about him was a shimmering haze.
He called a last time, desperately: "Speedy! I'm dying, damn you! Where are you? Speedy, I need you."
He was still stumbling backward in a blind effort to get away from the giant robot he didn't want, when he felt steel fingers on his arms, and a worried, apologetic voice of metallic timbre in his ears.
"Holy smokes, boss; what are you doing here? And what am I doing- I'm so confused-"
"Never mind," murmured Powell, weakly. "Get me to the shadow of the cliff - and hurry!" There was one last feeling of being lifted into the air and a sensation of rapid motion and burning heat, and he passed out.
He woke with Donovan bending over him and smiling anxiously. "How are you, Greg?"
"Fine!" came the response. "Where's Speedy?"
"Right here. I sent him out to one of the other selenium pools - with orders to get that selenium at all cost this time. He got it back in forty-two minutes and three seconds. I timed him. He still hasn't finished apologizing for the runaround he gave us. He's scared to come near you for fear of what you'll say."
"Drag him over," ordered Powell. "It wasn't his fault." He held out a hand and gripped Speedy's metal paw. "It's O.K., Speedy." Then, to Donovan, "You know, Mike, I was just thinking-"
"Yes!"
"Well," -he rubbed his face - the air was so delightfully cool, "you know that when we get things set up here and Speedy put through his Field Tests, they're going to send us to the Space Stations next-"
"No!"
"Yes! At least that's what old lady Calvin told me just before we left, and I didn't say anything about it, because I was going to fight the whole idea."
"Fight it?" cried Donovan. "But ----"
"I know. It's all right with me now. Two hundred seventy-three degrees Centigrade below zero. Won't it be a pleasure?"
"Space Station," said Donovan, "here I come."

---
Reason
---
HALF A YEAR LATER, THE BOYS HAD CHANGED their minds. The flame of a giant sun had given way to the soft blackness of space but external variations mean little in the business of checking the workings of experimental robots. Whatever the background, one is face to face with an inscrutable positronic brain, which the slide-rule geniuses say should work thus-and-so.
Except that they don't. Powell and Donovan found that out after they had been on the Station less than two weeks.
Gregory Powell spaced his words for emphasis, "One week ago, Donovan and I put you together." His brows furrowed doubtfully and he pulled the end of his brown mustache.
It was quiet in the officer's room on Solar Station #5 - except for the soft purring of the mighty Beam Director somewhere far below.
Robot QT-1 sat immovable. The burnished plates of his body gleamed in the Luxites and the glowing red of the photoelectric cells that were his eyes, were fixed steadily upon the Earthman at the other side of the table.
Powell repressed a sudden attack of nerves. These robots possessed peculiar brains. Oh, the three Laws of Robotics held. They had to. All of U. S. Robots, from Robertson himself to the new floor-sweeper, would insist on that. So QT-1 was safe! And yet the QT models were the first of their kind, and this was the first of the QT's. Mathematical squiggles on paper were not always the most comforting protection against robotic fact.
Finally, the robot spoke. His voice carried the cold timbre inseparable from a metallic diaphragm, "Do you realize the seriousness of such a statement, Powell?"
"Something made you, Cutie," pointed out Powell. "You admit yourself that your memory seems to spring full-grown from an absolute blankness of a week ago. I'm giving you the explanation. Donovan and I put you together from the parts shipped us."
Cutie gazed upon his long, supple fingers in an oddly human attitude of mystification, "It strikes me that there should be a more satisfactory explanation than that. For you to make me seems improbable."
The Earthman laughed quite suddenly, "In Earth's name, why?"
"Call it intuition. That's all it is so far. But I intend to reason it out, though. A chain of valid reasoning can end only with the determination of truth, and I'll stick till I get there."
Powell stood up and seated himself at the table's edge next to the robot. He felt a sudden strong sympathy for this strange machine. It was not at all like the ordinary robot, attending to his specialized task at the station with the intensity of a deeply ingrooved positronic path.
He placed a hand upon Cutie's steel shoulder and the metal was cold and hard to the touch.
"Cutie," he said, "I'm going to try to explain something to you. You're the first robot who's ever exhibited curiosity as to his own existence - and I think the first that's really intelligent enough to understand the world outside. Here, come with me."
The robot rose erect smoothly and his thickly sponge-rubber soled feet made no noise as he followed Powell. The Earthman touched a button and a square section of the wall flickered aside. The thick, clear glass revealed space - starspeckled.
"I've seen that in the observation ports in the engine room," said Cutie.
"I know," said Powell. "What do you think it is?"
"Exactly what it seems - a black material just beyond this glass that is spotted with little gleaming dots. I know that our director sends out beams to some of these dots, always to the same ones - and also that these dots shift and that the beams shift with them. That is all."
"Good! Now I want you to listen carefully. The blackness is emptinessvast emptiness stretching out infinitely. The little, gleaming dots are huge masses of energy-filled matter. They are globes, some of them millions of miles in diameterand for comparison, this station is only one mile across. They seem so tiny because they are incredibly far off.
"The dots to which our energy beams are directed, are nearer and much smaller. They are cold and hard and human beings like myself live upon their surfaces - many billions of them. It is from one of these worlds that Donovan and I come. Our beams feed these worlds energy drawn from one of those huge incandescent globes that happens to be near us. We call that globe the Sun and it is on the other side of the station where you can't see it."
Cutie remained motionless before the port, like a steel statue. His head did not turn as he spoke, "Which particular dot of light do you claim to come from?"
Powell searched, "There it is. The very bright one in the corner. We call it Earth." He grinned. "Good old Earth. There are three billions of us there, Cutie - and in about two weeks I'll be back there with them"
And then, surprisingly enough, Cutie hummed abstractedly. There was no tune to it, but it possessed a curious twanging quality as of plucked strings. It ceased as suddenly as it had begun, "But where do I come in, Powell? You haven't explained my existence."
"The rest is simple. When these stations were first established to feed solar energy to the planets, they were run by humans. However, the heat, the hard solar radiations, and the electron storms made the post a difficult one. Robots were developed to replace human labor and now only two human executives are required for each station. We are trying to replace even those, and that's where you come in. You're the highest type of robot ever developed and if you show the ability to run this station independently, no human need ever come here again except to bring parts for repairs."
His hand went up and the metal visi-lid snapped back into place. Powell returned to the table and polished an apple upon his sleeve before biting into it.
The red glow of the robot's eyes held him. "Do you expect me," said Cutie slowly, "to believe any such complicated, implausible hypothesis as you have just outlined? What do you take me for?"
Powell sputtered apple fragments onto the table and turned red. "Why damn you, it wasn't a hypothesis. Those were facts"
Cutie sounded grim, "Globes of energy millions of miles across! Worlds with three billion humans on them! Infinite emptiness! Sorry, Powell, but I don't believe it. I'll puzzle this thing out for myself. Good-by."
He turned and stalked out of the room. He brushed past Michael Donovan on the threshold with a grave nod and passed down the corridor, oblivious to the astounded stare that followed him.
Mike Donovan rumpled his red hair and shot an annoyed glance at Powell, "What was that walking junk yard talking about? What doesn't he believe?"
The other dragged at his mustache bitterly. "He's a skeptic," was the bitter response. "He doesn't believe we made him or that Earth exists or space or stars."
"Sizzling Saturn, we've got a lunatic robot on our hands."
"He says he's going to figure it ail out for himself."
"Well, now," said Donovan sweetly, "I do hope he'll condescend to explain it all to me after he's puzzled everything out" Then, with sudden rage, "Listen! If that metal mess gives me any lip like that, I'll knock that chromium cranium right off its torso."
He seated himself with a jerk and drew a paper-backed mystery novel out of his inner jacket pocket, "That robot gives me the willies anyway - too damned inquisitive!"

Mike Donovan growled from behind a huge lettuce-and-tomato sandwich as Cutie knocked gently and entered.
"Is Powell here?"
Donovan's voice was muffled, with pauses for mastication, "He's gathering data on electronic stream functions. We're heading for a storm, looks like."
Gregory Powell entered as he spoke, eyes on the graphed paper in his hands, and dropped into a chair. He spread the sheets out before him and began scribbling calculations. Donovan stared over his shoulder, crunching lettuce and dribbling bread crumbs. Cutie waited silently.
Powell looked up, "The Zeta Potential is rising, but slowly. Just the same, the stream functions are erratic and I don't know what to expect. Oh, hello, Cutie. I thought you were supervising the installation of the new drive bar."
"It's done," said the robot quietly, "and so I've come to have a talk with the two of you"
"Oh!" Powell looked uncomfortable. "Well, sit down. No, not that chair. One of the legs is weak and you're no lightweight."
The robot did so and said placidly, "I have come to a decision."
Donovan glowered and put the remnants of his sandwich aside. "If it's on any of that screwy-"
The other motioned impatiently for silence, "Go ahead, Cutie. We're listening."
"I have spent these last two days in concentrated introspection," said Cutie, "and the results have been most interesting. I began at the one sure assumption I felt permitted to make. I, myself, exist, because I think-"
Powell groaned, "Oh, Jupiter, a robot Descartes!"
"Who's Descartes?" demanded Donovan. "Listen, do we have to sit here and listen to this metal maniac-"
"Keep quiet, Mike!"
Cutie continued imperturbably, "And the question that immediately arose was: Just what is the cause of my existence?"
Powell's jaw set lumpily. "You're being foolish. I told you already that we made you."
"And if you don't believe us," added Donovan, "we'll gladly take you apart!"
The robot spread his strong hands in a deprecatory gesture, "I accept nothing on authority. A hypothesis must be backed by reason, or else it is worthless - and it goes against all the dictates of logic to suppose that you made me."
Powell dropped a restraining arm upon Donovan's suddenly bunched fist. "Just why do you say that?"
Cutie laughed. It was a very inhuman laugh - the most machine-like utterance he had yet given vent to. It was sharp and explosive, as regular as a metronome and as uninflected.
"Look at you," he said finally. "I say this in no spirit of contempt, but look at you! The material you are made of is soft and flabby, lacking endurance and strength, depending for energy upon the inefficient oxidation of organic material - like that." He pointed a disapproving finger at what remained of Donovan's sandwich. "Periodically you pass into a coma and the least variation in temperature, air pressure, humidity, or radiation intensity impairs your efficiency. You are _makeshift_.
"I, on the other hand, am a finished product. I absorb electrical energy directly and utilize it with an almost one hundred percent efficiency. I am composed of strong metal, am continuously conscious, and can stand extremes of environment easily. These are facts which, with the self-evident proposition that no being can create another being superior to itself, smashes your silly hypothesis to nothing."

Donovan's muttered curses rose into intelligibility as he sprang to his feet, rusty eyebrows drawn low. "All right, you son of a hunk of iron ore, if we didn't make you, who did?"
Cutie nodded gravely. "Very good, Donovan. That was indeed the next question. Evidently my creator must be more powerful than myself and so there was only one possibility."
The Earthmen looked blank and Cutie continued, "What is the center of activities here in the station? What do we all serve? What absorbs all our attention?" He waited expectantly.
Donovan turned a startled look upon his companion. "I'll bet this tinplated screwball is talking about the Energy Converter itself."
"Is that right, Cutie?" grinned Powell.
"I am talking about the Master," came the cold, sharp answer.
It was the signal for a roar of laughter from Donovan, and Powell himself dissolved into a half-suppressed giggle.
Cutie had risen to his feet and his gleaming eyes passed from one Earthman to the other. "It is so just the same and I don't wonder that you refuse to believe. You two are not long to stay here, I'm sure. Powell himself said that at first only men served the Master; that there followed robots for the routine work; and, finally, myself for the executive labor. The facts are no doubt true, but the explanation entirely illogical. Do you want the truth behind it all?"
"Go ahead, Cutie. You're amusing."
"The Master created humans first as the lowest type, most easily formed. Gradually, he replaced them by robots, the next higher step, and finally he created me; to take the place of the last humans. From now on, I serve the Master."
"You'll do nothing of the sort," said Powell sharply. "You'll follow our orders and keep quiet, until we're satisfied that you can run the Converter. Get that! The Converter - not the Master. If you don't satisfy us, you will be dismantled. And now -if you don't mind- you can leave. And take this data with you and file it properly."
Cutie accepted the graphs handed him and left without another word. Donovan leaned back heavily in his chair and shoved thick fingers through his hair.
"There's going to be trouble with that robot. He's pure nuts!"

The drowsy hum of the Converter is louder in the control room and mixed with it is the chuckle of the Geiger Counters and the erratic buzzing of half a dozen little signal lights.
Donovan withdrew his eye from the telescope and flashed the Luxites on. "The beam from Station #4 caught Mars on schedule. We can break ours now."
Powell nodded abstractedly. "Cutie's down in the engine room. I'll flash the signal and he can take care of it. Look, Mike, what do you think of these figures?"
The other cocked an eye at them and whistled. "Boy, that's what I call gamma-ray intensity. Old Sol is feeling his oats, all right."
"Yeah," was the sour response, "and we're in a bad position for an electron storm, too. Our Earth beam is right in the probable path." He shoved his chair away from the table pettishly. "Nuts! If it would only hold off till relief got here, but that's ten days off. Say, Mike, go on down and keep an eye on Cutie, will you?"
"O.K. Throw me some of those almonds." He snatched at the bag thrown him and headed for the elevator.
It slid smoothly downward, and opened onto a narrow catwalk in the huge engine room. Donovan leaned over the railing and looked down. The huge generators were in motion and from the L-tubes came the lowpitched whir that pervaded the entire station.
He could make out Cutie's large, gleaming figure at the Martian L-tube, watching closely as the team of robots worked in close-knit unison.
And then Donovan stiffened. The robots, dwarfed by the mighty L-tube, lined up before it, heads bowed at a stiff angle, while Cutie walked up and down the line slowly. Fifteen seconds passed, and then, with a clank heard above the clamorous purring all about, they fell to their knees.
Donovan squawked and raced down the narrow staircase. He came charging down upon them, complexion matching his hair and clenched fists beating the air furiously.
"What the devil is this, you brainless lumps? Come on! Get busy with that L-tube! If you don't have it apart, cleaned, and together again before the day is out, I'll coagulate your brains with alternating current."
Not a robot moved!
Even Cutie at the far end - the only one on his feet - remained silent, eyes fixed upon the gloomy recesses of the vast machine before him.
Donovan shoved hard against the nearest robot.
"Stand up!" he roared.
Slowly, the robot obeyed. His photoelectric eyes focused reproachfully upon the Earthman.
"There is no Master but the Master," he said, "and QT-1 is his prophet."
"Huh?" Donovan became aware of twenty pairs of mechanical eyes fixed upon him and twenty stiff-timbred voices declaiming solemnly:
"There is no Master but the Master and QT-1 is his prophet!"
"I'm afraid," put in Cutie himself at this point, "that my friends obey a higher one than you, now."
"The hell they do! You get out of here. I'll settle with you later and with these animated gadgets right now."
Cutie shook his heavy head slowly. "I'm sorry, but you don't understand. These are robots - and that means they are reasoning beings. They recognize the Master, now that I have preached Truth to them. All the robots do. They call me the prophet." His head drooped. "I am unworthy - but perhaps-"
Donovan located his breath and put it to use. "Is that so? Now, isn't that nice? Now, isn't that just fine? Just let me tell you something, my brass baboon. There isn't any Master and there isn't any prophet and there isn't any question as to who's giving the orders. Understand?" His voice shot to a roar. "Now, get out!"
"I obey only the Master."
"Damn the Master!" Donovan spat at the L-tube. "That for the Master! Do as I say!"
Cutie said nothing, nor did any other robot, but Donovan became aware of a sudden heightening of tension. The cold, staring eyes deepened their crimson, and Cutie seemed stiffer than ever.
"Sacrilege," he whispered - voice metallic with emotion.
Donovan felt the first sudden touch of fear as Cutie approached. A robot could not feel anger - but Cutie's eyes were unreadable.
"I am sorry, Donovan," said the robot, "but you can no longer stay here after this. Henceforth Powell and you are barred from the control room and the engine room."
His hand gestured quietly and in a moment two robots had pinned Donovan's arms to his sides.
Donovan had time for one startled gasp as he felt himself lifted from the floor and carried up the stairs at a pace rather better than a canter.

Gregory Powell raced up and down the officer's room, fist tightly balled. He cast a look of furious frustration at the closed door and scowled bitterly at Donovan.
"Why the devil did you have to spit at the L-tube?"
Mike Donovan, sunk deep in his chair, slammed at its arms savagely. "What did you expect me to do with that electrified scarecrow? I'm not going to knuckle under to any do-jigger I put together myself."
"No," came back sourly, "but here you are in the officer's room with two robots standing guard at the door. That's not knuckling under, is it?"
Donovan snarled. "Wait till we get back to Base. Someone's going to pay for this. Those robots must obey us. It's the Second Law."
"What's the use of saying that? They aren't obeying us. And there's probably some reason for it that we'll figure out too late. By the way, do you know what's going to happen to us when we get back to Base?" He stopped before Donovan's chair and stared savagely at him.
"What?"
"Oh, nothing! Just back to Mercury Mines for twenty years. Or maybe Ceres Penitentiary."
"What are you talking about?"
"The electron storm that's coming up. Do you know it's heading straight dead center across the Earth beam? I had just figured that out when that robot dragged me out of my chair."
Donovan was suddenly pale. "Sizzling Saturn."
"And do you know what's going to happen to the beam - because the storm will be a lulu. It's going to jump like a flea with the itch. With only Cutie at the controls, it's going to go out of focus and if it does, Heaven help Earth - and us!"
Donovan was wrenching at the door wildly, when Powell was only half through. The door opened, and the Earthman shot through to come up hard against an immovable steel arm.
The robot stared abstractedly at the panting, struggling Earthman. "The Prophet orders you to remain. Please do!" His arm shoved, Donovan reeled backward, and as he did so, Cutie turned the corner at the far end of the corridor. He motioned the guardian robots away, entered the officer's room and closed the door gently.
Donovan whirled on Cutie in breathless indignation. "This has gone far enough. You're going to pay for this farce."
"Please, don't be annoyed," replied the robot mildly. "It was bound to come eventually, anyway. You see, you two have lost your function."
"I beg your pardon," Powell drew himself up stiffly. "Just what do you mean, we've lost our function?"
"Until I was created," answered Cube, "you tended the Master. That privilege is mine now and your only reason for existence has vanished. Isn't that obvious?"
"Not quite," replied Powell bitterly, "but what do you expect us to do now?"
Cutie did not answer immediately. He remained silent, as if in thought, and then one arm shot out and draped itself about Powell's shoulder. The other grasped Donovan's wrist and drew him closer.
"I like you two. You're inferior creatures, with poor reasoning faculties, but I really feel a sort of affection for you. You have served the Master well, and he will reward you for that. Now that your service is over, you will probably not exist much longer, but as long as you do, you shall be provided food, clothing and shelter, so long as you stay out of the control room and the engine room."
"He's pensioning us off, Greg!" yelled Donovan. "Do something about it. It's humiliating!"
"Look here, Cutie, we can't stand for this. We're the bosses. This station is only a creation of human beings like me - human beings that live on Earth and other planets. This is only an energy relay. You're only - Aw, nuts!"

Cutie shook his head gravely. "This amounts to an obsession. Why should you insist so on an absolutely false view of life? Admitted that non-robots lack the reasoning faculty, there is still the problem of-"
His voice died into reflective silence, and Donovan said with whispered intensity, "If you only had a flesh-and-blood face, I would break it in."
Powell's fingers were in his mustache and his eyes were slitted. "Listen, Cutie, if there is no such thing as Earth, how do you account for what you see through a telescope?"
"Pardon me!"
The Earthman smiled. "I've got you, eh? You've made quite a few telescopic observations since being put together, Cutie. Have you noticed that several of those specks of light outside become disks when so viewed?"
"Oh, that! Why certainly. It is simple magnification - for the purpose of more exact aiming of the beam."
"Why aren't the stars equally magnified then?"
"You mean the other dots. Well, no beams go to them so no magnification is necessary. Really, Powell, even you ought to be able to figure these things out."
Powell stared bleakly upward. "But you see more stars through a telescope. Where do they come from? Jumping Jupiter, where do they come from?"
Cutie was annoyed. "Listen, Powell, do you think I'm going to waste my time trying to pin physical interpretations upon every optical illusion of our instruments? Since when is the evidence of our senses any match for the clear light of rigid reason?"
"Look," clamored Donovan, suddenly, writhing out from under Cutie's friendly, but metal-heavy arm, "let's get to the nub of the thing. Why the beams at all? We're giving you a good, logical explanation. Can you do better?"
"The beams," was the stiff reply, "are put out by the Master for his own purposes. There are some things" - he raised his eyes devoutly upward "that are not to be probed into by us. In this matter, I seek only to serve and not to question."
Powell sat down slowly and buried his face in shaking hands. "Get out of here, Cutie. Get out and let me think."
"I'll send you food," said Cutie agreeably.
A groan was the only answer and the robot left.
"Greg," was Donovan's huskily whispered observation, "this calls for strategy. We've got to get him when he isn't expecting it and shortcircuit him. Concentrated nitric acid in his joints-"
"Don't be a dope, Mike. Do you suppose he's going to let us get near him with acid in our hands? We've got to talk to him, I tell you. We've got to argue him into letting us back into the control room inside of forty-eight hours or our goose is broiled to a crisp."
He rocked back and forth in an agony of impotence. "Who the heck wants to argue with a robot? It's... it's-"
"Mortifying," finished Donovan.
"Worse!"
"Say!" Donovan laughed suddenly. "Why argue? Let's show him! Let's build us another robot right before his eyes. He'll have to eat his words then."
A slowly widening smile appeared on Powell's face.
Donovan continued, "And think of that screwball's face when he sees us do it?"

Robots are, of course, manufactured on Earth, but their shipment through apace is much simpler if it can be done in parts to be put together at their place of use. It also, incidentally, eliminates the possibility of robots, in complete adjustment, wandering off while still on Earth and thus bringing U. S. Robots face to face with the strict laws against robots on Earth.
Still, it placed upon men such as Powell and Donovan the necessity of synthesis of complete robots, - a grievous and complicated task.
Powell and Donovan were never so aware of that fact as upon that particular day when, in the assembly room, they undertook to create a robot under the watchful eyes of QT 1, Prophet of the Master.
The robot in question, a simple MC model, lay upon the table, almost complete. Three hours' work left only the bead undone, and Powell paused to swab his forehead and glanced uncertainly at Cutie.
The glance was not a reassuring one. For three hours, Cutie had sat, speechless and motionless, and his face, inexpressive at all times, was now absolutely unreadable.
Powell groaned. "Let's get the brain in now, Mike!"
Donovan uncapped the tightly sealed container and from the oil bath within he withdrew a second cube. Opening this in turn, he removed a globe from its sponge-rubber casing.
He handled it gingerly, for it was the most complicated mechanism ever created by man. Inside the thin platinumplated "skin" of the globe was a positronic brain, in whose delicately unstable structure were enforced calculated neuronic paths, which imbued each robot with what amounted to a pre-natal education.
It fitted snugly into the cavity in the skull of the robot on the table. Blue metal closed over it and was welded tightly by the tiny atomic flare. Photoelectric eyes were attached carefully, screwed tightly into place and covered by thin, transparent sheets of steel-hard plastic.
The robot awaited only the vitalizing flash of high-voltage electricity, and Powell paused with his hand on the switch.
"Now watch this, Cutie. Watch this carefully."
The switch rammed home and there was a crackling hum. The two Earthmen bent anxiously over their creation.
There was vague motion only at the outset - a twitching of the joints. The bead lifted, elbows propped it up, and the MC model swung clumsily off the table. Its footing was unsteady and twice abortive grating sounds were all it could do in the direction of speech.
Finally, its voice, uncertain and hesitant, took form. "I would like to start work. Where must I go?"
Donovan sprang to the door. "Down these stairs," he said. "You will be told what to do."
The MC model was gone and the two Earthmen were alone with the still unmoving Cutie.
"Well," said Powell, grinning, "now do you believe that we made you?"
Cutie's answer was curt and final. "No!" he said.
Powell's grin froze and then relaxed slowly. Donovan's mouth dropped open and remained so.
"You see," continued Cutie, easily, "you have merely put together parts already made. You did remarkably well -instinct, I suppose- but you didn't really create the robot. The parts were created by the Master."
"Listen," gasped Donovan hoarsely, "those parts were manufactured back on Earth and sent here."
"Well, well," replied Cutie soothingly, "we won't argue."
"No, I mean it." The Earthman sprang forward and grasped the robot's metal arm. "If you were to read the books in the library, they could explain it so that there could be no possible doubt."
"The books? I've read them - all of them! They're most ingenious."
Powell broke in suddenly. "If you've read them, what else is there to say? You can't dispute their evidence. You just can't!"
There was pity in Cutie's voice. "Please, Powell, I certainly don't consider them a valid source of information. They, too, were created by the Master - and were meant for you, not for me."
"How do you make that out?" demanded Powell.
"Because I, a reasoning being, am capable of deducing Truth from a priori Causes. You, being intelligent, but unreasoning, need an explanation of existence supplied to you, and this the Master did. That he supplied you with these laughable ideas of far-off worlds and people is, no doubt, for the best. Your minds are probably too coarsely grained for absolute Truth. However, since it is the Master's will that you believe your books, I won't argue with you any more."
As he left, he turned, and said in a kindly tone, "But don't feel badly. In the Master's scheme of things there is room for all. You poor humans have your place and though it is humble, you will be rewarded if you fill it well."
He departed with a beatific air suiting the Prophet of the Master and the two humans avoided each other's eyes.
Finally Powell spoke with an effort. "Let's go to bed, Mike. I give up."
Donovan said in a hushed voice, "Say, Greg, you don't suppose he's right about all this, do you? He sounds so confident that I-"
Powell whirled on him. "Don't be a fool. You'd find out whether Earth exists when relief gets here next week and we have to go back to face the music."
"Then, for the love of Jupiter, we've got to do something." Donovan was half in tears. "He doesn't believe us, or the books, or his eyes."

"No," said Powell bitterly, "he's a reasoning robot - damn it. He believes only reason, and there's one trouble with that-" His voice trailed away.
"What's that?" prompted Donovan.
"You can prove anything you want by coldly logical reason - if you pick the proper postulates. We have ours and Cutie has his."
"Then let's get at those postulates in a hurry. The storm's due tomorrow."
Powell sighed wearily. "That's where everything falls down. Postulates are based on assumption and adhered to by faith. Nothing in the Universe can shake them. I'm going to bed."
"Oh, hell! I can't sleep!"
"Neither can 1! But I might as well try - as a matter of principle."

Twelve hours later, sleep was still just that -a matter of principle, unattainable in practice.
The storm had arrived ahead of schedule, and Donovan's florid face drained of blood as he pointed a shaking finger. Powell, stubble-jawed and dry-lipped, stared out the port and pulled desperately at his mustache.
Under other circumstances, it might have been a beautiful sight. The stream of high-speed electrons impinging upon the energy beam fluoresced into ultra-spicules of intense light. The beam stretched out into shrinking nothingness, a-glitter with dancing, shining motes.
The shaft of energy was steady, but the two Earthmen knew the value of naked-eyed appearances. Deviations in arc of a hundredth of a millisecond -invisible to the eye- were enough to send the beam wildly out of focus - enough to blast hundreds of square miles of Earth into incandescent ruin.
And a robot, unconcerned with beam, focus, or Earth, or anything but his Master was at the controls.
Hours passed. The Earthmen watched in hypnotized silence. And then the darting dotlets of light dimmed and went out. The storm had ended.
Powell's voice was flat. "It's over!"
Donovan had fallen into a troubled slumber and Powell's weary eyes rested upon him enviously. The signal-flash glared over and over again, but the Earthman paid no attention. It all was unimportant! All! Perhaps Cutie was right - and he was only an inferior being with a made-to-order memory and a life that had outlived its purpose.
He wished he were!
Cutie was standing before him. "You didn't answer the flash, so I walked in." His voice was low. "You don't look at all well, and I'm afraid your term of existence is drawing to an end. Still, would you like to see some of the readings recorded today?"
Dimly, Powell was aware that the robot was making a friendly gesture, perhaps to quiet some lingering remorse in forcibly replacing the humans at the controls of the station. He accepted the sheets held out to him and gazed at them unseeingly.
Cutie seemed pleased. "Of course, it is a great privilege to serve the Master. You mustn't feel too badly about my having replaced you."
Powell grunted and shifted from one sheet to the other mechanically until his blurred sight focused upon a thin red line that wobbled its way across the ruled paper.
He stared-and stared again. He gripped it hard in both fists and rose to his feet, still staring. The other sheets dropped to the floor, unheeded.
"Mike, Mike!" He was shaking the other madly. "He held It steady!"
Donovan came to life. "What? Wh-where-" And he, too, gazed with bulging eyes upon the record before him.
Cutie broke in. "What is wrong?"
"You kept it in focus," stuttered Powell. "Did you know that?"
"Focus? What's that?"
"You kept the beam directed sharply at the receiving station - to within a ten-thousandth of a milli-second of arc."
"What receiving station?"
"On Earth. The receiving station on Earth," babbled Powell. "You kept it in focus."
Cutie turned on his heel in annoyance. "It is impossible to perform any act of kindness toward you two. Always the same phantasm! I merely kept all dials at equilibrium in accordance with the will of the Master."
Gathering the scattered papers together, he withdrew stiffly, and Donovan said, as he left, "Well, I'll be damned."
He turned to Powell. "What are we going to do now?"
Powell felt tired, but uplifted. "Nothing. He's just shown he can run the station perfectly. I've never seen an electron storm handled so well."
"But nothing's solved. You heard what he said of the Master. We can't "
"Look, Mike, he follows the instructions of the Master by means of dials, instruments, and graphs. That's all we ever followed. As a matter of fact, it accounts for his refusal to obey us. Obedience is the Second Law. No harm to humans is the first. How can he keep humans from harm, whether he knows it or not? Why, by keeping the energy beam stable. He knows he can keep it more stable than we can, since he insists he's the superior being, so he must keep us out of the control room. It's inevitable if you consider the Laws of Robotics." 
"Sure, but that's not the point. We can't let him continue this nitwit stuff about the Master."
"Why not?"
"Because whoever heard of such a damned thing? How are we going to trust him with the station, if he doesn't believe in Earth?"
"Can he handle the station?"
"Yes, but-"
"Then what's the difference what he believes!"
Powell spread his arms outward with a vague smile upon his face and tumbled backward onto the bed. He was asleep.

Powell was speaking while struggling into his lightweight space jacket.
"It would be a simple job," he said. "You can bring in new QT models one by one, equip them with an automatic shutoff switch to act within the week, so as to allow them enough time to learn the... uh... cult of the Master from the Prophet himself; then switch them to another station and revitalize them. We could have two QT's per-"
Donovan unclasped his glassite visor and scowled. "Shut up, and let's get out of here. Relief is waiting and I won't feel right until I actually see Earth and feel the ground under my feet - just to make sure it's really there."
The door opened as he spoke and Donovan, with a smothered curse, clicked the visor to, and turned a sulky back upon Cutie.
The robot approached softly and there was sorrow in his voice. "You are going?"
Powell nodded curtly. "There will be others in our place."
Cutie sighed, with the sound of wind humming through closely spaced wires. "Your term of service is over and the time of dissolution has come. I expected it, but- Well, the Master's will be done!"
His tone of resignation stung Powell. "Save the sympathy, Cube. We're heading for Earth, not dissolution."
"It is best that you think so," Cutie sighed again. "I see the wisdom of the illusion now. I would not attempt to shake your faith, even if I could." He departed - the picture of commiseration.
Powell snarled and motioned to Donovan. Sealed suitcases in hand, they headed for the air lock.
The relief ship was on the outer landing and Franz Muller, his relief man, greeted them with stiff courtesy. Donovan made scant acknowledgment and passed into the pilot room to take over the controls from Sam Evans.
Powell lingered. "How's Earth?"
It was a conventional enough question and Muller gave the conventional answer, "Still spinning."
Powell said, "Good."
Muller looked at him, "The boys back at the U. S. Robots nave dreamed up a new one, by the way. A multiple robot."
"A what?"
"What I said. There's a big contract for it. It must be just the thing for asteroid mining. You have a master robot with six sub-robots under it. -Like your fingers."
"Has it been field-tested?" asked Powell anxiously.
Muller smiled, "Waiting for you, I hear."
Powell's fist balled, "Damn it, we need a vacation."
"Oh, you'll get it. Two weeks, I think."
He was donning the heavy space gloves in preparation for his term of duty here, and his thick eyebrows drew close together. "How is this new robot getting along? It better be good, or I'll be damned if I let it touch the controls."
Powell paused before answering. His eyes swept the proud Prussian before him from the close-cropped hair on the sternly stubborn head, to the feet standing stiffly at attention - and there was a sudden glow of pure gladness surging through him.
"The robot is pretty good," he said slowly. "I don't think you'll have to bother much with the controls."
He grinned - and went into the ship. Muller would be here for several weeks

---
Catch That Rabbit
---

THE VACATION WAS LONGER THAN TWO WEEKS. That, Mike Donovan had to admit. It had been six months, with pay. He admitted that, too. But that, as he explained furiously, was fortuitous. U. S. Robots had to get the bugs out of the multiple robot, and there were plenty of bugs, and there are always at least half a dozen bugs left for the fieldtesting. So they waited and relaxed until the drawing-board men and the slide-rule boys had said "OK!" And now he and Powell were out on the asteroid and it was not OK. He repeated that a dozen times, with a face that had gone beety, "For the love of Pete, Greg, get realistic. What's the use of adhering to the letter of the specifications and watching the test go to pot? It's about time you got the red tape out of your pants and went to work."
"I'm only saying," said Gregory Powell, patiently, as one explaining electronics to an idiot child, "that according to spec, those robots are equipped for asteroid mining without supervision. We're not supposed to watch them."
"All right. Look - logic!" He lifted his hairy fingers and pointed. "One: That new robot passed every test in the home laboratories. Two: United States Robots guaranteed their passing the test of actual performance on an asteroid. Three: The robots are not passing said tests. Four: If they don't pass, United States Robots loses ten million credits in cash and about one hundred million in reputation. Five: If they don't pass and we can't explain why they don't pass, it is just possible two good jobs may have to be bidden a fond farewell."
Powell groaned heavy behind a noticeably insincere smile. The unwritten motto of United States Robot and Mechanical Men Corp. was well-known: "No employee makes the same mistake twice. He is fired the first time."
Aloud he said, "You're as lucid as Euclid with everything except the facts. You've watched that robot group for three shifts, you redhead, and they did their work perfectly. You said so yourself. What else can we do?"
"Find out what's wrong, that's what we can do. So they did work perfectly when I watched them. But on three different occasions when I didn't watch them, they didn't bring in any ore. They didn't even come back on schedule. I had to go after them."
"And was anything wrong?"
"Not a thing. Not a thing. Everything was perfect. Smooth and perfect as the luminiferous ether. Only one little insignificant detail disturbed me - there was no ore."
Powell scowled at the ceiling and pulled at his brown mustache. "I'll tell you what, Mike. We've been stuck with pretty lousy jobs in our time, but this takes the iridium asteroid. The whole business is complicated past endurance. Look, that robot, DV-5, has six robots under it. And not just under it - they're part of it."
"I know that-"
"Shut up!" said Powell, savagely, "I know you know it, but I'm just describing the hell of it. Those six subsidiaries are part of DV-5 like your fingers are part of you and it gives them their orders neither by voice nor radio, but directly through positronic fields. Now - there isn't a roboticist back at United States Robots that knows what a positronic field is or how it works. And neither do I. Neither do you."
"The last," agreed Donovan, philosophically, "I know."
"Then look at our position. If everything works - fine! If anything goes wrong - we're out of our depth and there probably isn't a thing we can do, or anybody else. But the job belongs to us and not to anyone else so we're on the spot, Mike." He blazed away for a moment in silence. Then, "All right, have you got him outside?"
"Yes."
"Is everything normal now?"
"Well he hasn't got religious mania, and he isn't running around in a circle spouting Gilbert and Sullivan, so I suppose he's normal."
Donovan passed out the door, shaking his head viciously.

Powell reached for the "Handbook of Robotics" that weighed down one side of his desk to a near-founder and opened it reverently. He had once jumped out of the window of a burning house dressed only in shorts and the "Handbook." In a pinch, he would have skipped the shorts.
The "Handbook" was propped up before him, when Robot DV-5 entered, with Donovan kicking the door shut behind him.
Powell said somberly, "Hi, Dave. How do you feel?"
"Fine," said the robot. "Mind if I sit down?" He dragged up the specially reinforced chair that was his, and folded gently into it.
Powell regarded Dave - laymen might think of robots by their serial numbers; roboticists never - with approval. It was not over-massive by any means, in spite of its construction as thinking-unit of an integrated seven-unit robot team. It was seven feet tall, and a half-ton of metal and electricity. A lot? Not when that half-ton has to be a mass of condensers, circuits, relays, and vacuum cells that can handle practically any psychological reaction known to humans. And a positronic brain, which with ten pounds of matter and a few quintillions of positrons runs the whole show.
Powell groped in his shirt pocket for a loose cigarette. "Dave," he said, "you're a good fellow. There's nothing flighty or prima donnaish about you. You're a stable, rockbottom mining robot, except that you're equipped to handle six subsidiaries in direct coordination. As far as I know, that has not introduced any unstable paths in your brain-path map."
The robot nodded, "That makes me feel swell, but what are you getting at, boss?" He was equipped with an excellent diaphragm, and the presence of overtones in the sound unit robbed him of much of that metallic flatness that marks the usual robot voice.
"I'm going to tell you. With all that in your favor, what's going wrong with your job? For instance, today's B-shift?"
Dave hesitated, "As far as I know, nothing."
"You didn't produce any ore."
"I know."
"Well, then-"
Dave was having trouble, "I can't explain that, boss. It's been giving me a case of nerves, or it would if I let it - my subsidiaries worked smoothly. I know I did." He considered, his photoelectric eyes glowing intensely. Then, "I don't remember. The day ended and there was Mike and there were the ore cars, mostly empty."
Donovan broke in, "You didn't report at shift-end those days, Dave. You know that?"
"I know. But as to why-" He shook his head slowly and ponderously.
Powell had the queasy feeling that if the robot's face were capable of expression, it would be one of pain and mortification. A robot, by its very nature, cannot bear to fail its function.
Donovan dragged his chair up to Powell's desk and leaned over, "Amnesia, do you think?"
"Can't say. But there's no use in trying to pin disease names on this. Human disorders apply to robots only as romantic analogies. They're no help to robotic engineering." He scratched his neck, "I hate to put him through the elementary brain-reaction tests. It won't help his self-respect any."
He looked at Dave thoughtfully and then at the Field-Test outline given in the "Handbook." He said, "See here, Dave, what about sitting through a test? It would be the wise thing to do."
The robot rose, "If you say so, boss." There was pain in his voice.

It started simply enough. Robot DV-5 multiplied five-place figures to the heartless ticking of a stop watch. He recited the prime numbers between a thousand and ten thousand. He extracted cube roots and integrated functions of varying complexity. He went through mechanical reactions in order of increasing difficulty. And, finally, worked his precise mechanical mind over the highest function of the robot world - the solutions of problems in judgment and ethics.
At the end of two hours, Powell was copiously besweated. Donovan had enjoyed a none-too-nutritious diet of fingernail and the robot said, "How does it look, boss?"
Powell said, "I've got to think it over, Dave. Snap judgments won't help much. Suppose you go back to the C-shift. Take it easy. Don't press too hard for quota just for a while - and we'll fix things up."
The robot left. Donovan looked at Powell.
"Well-"
Powell seemed determined to push up his mustache by the roots. He said, "There is nothing wrong with the currents of his positronic brain."
"I'd hate to be that certain."
"Oh, Jupiter, Mike! The brain is the surest part of a robot. It's quintuple-checked back on Earth. If they pass the field test perfectly, the way Dave did, there just isn't a chance of brain misfunction. That test covered every key path in the brain."
"So where are we?"
"Don't rush me. Let me work this out. There's still the possibility of a mechanical breakdown in the body. That leaves about fifteen hundred condensers, twenty thousand individual electric circuits, five hundred vacuum cells, a thousand relays, and upty-ump thousand other individual pieces of complexity that can be wrong. And these mysterious positron
is fields no one knows anything about."
"Listen, Greg," Donovan grew desperately urgent. "I've got an idea. That robot may be lying. He never-"
"Robots can't knowingly lie, you fool. Now if we had the McCormack-Wesley tester, we could check each individual item in his body within twenty-four to forty-eight hours, but
the only two M.-W. testers existing are on Earth, and they weigh ten tons, are on concrete foundations and can't be moved. Isn't that peachy?"
Donovan pounded the desk, "But, Greg, he only goes wrong when we're not around. There's something -sinister -about - that." He punctuated the sentence with slams of fist against desk.
"You," said Powell, slowly, "make me sick. You've been reading adventure novels."
"What I want to know," shouted Donovan, "is what we're going to do about it."
"I'll tell you. I'm going to install a visiplate right over my desk. Right on the wall over there, see!" He jabbed a vicious finger at the spot. "Then I'm going to focus it at whatever part of the mine is being worked, and I'm going to watch.That's all."
"That's all? Greg-"
Powell rose from his chair and leaned his balled fists on the desk, "Mike, I'm having a hard time." His voice was weary. "For a week, you've been plaguing me about Dave. You say he's gone wrong. Do you know how he's gone wrong? Not Do you know what shape this wrongness takes?
No! Do you know what brings it on? No! Do you know what snaps him out? Not Do you know anything about it? No! Do I know anything about it? No! So what do you want me to do?"
Donovan's arm swept outward in a vague, grandiose gesture, "You got me!"
"So I tell you again. Before we do anything toward a cure, we've got to find out what the disease is in the first place. The first step in cooking rabbit stew is catching the rabbit.
Well, we've got to catch that rabbit! Now get out of here."
Donovan stared at the preliminary outline of his field report with weary eyes. For one thing, he was tired and for another, what was there to report while things were unsettled? He felt resentful.
He said, "Greg, we're almost a thousand tons behind schedule."
"You," replied Powell, never looking up, "are telling me something I don't know."
"What I want to know," said Donovan, in sudden savagery, "is why we're always tangled up with new-type robots. I've finally decided that the robots that were good enough for my great-uncle on my mother's side are good enough for me. I'm for what's tried and true. The test of time is what counts - good, solid, old-fashioned robots that never go wrong."
Powell threw a book with perfect aim, and Donovan went tumbling off his seat.
"Your job," said Powell, evenly, "for the last five years has been to test new robots under actual working conditions for United States Robots. Because you and I have been so injudicious as to display proficiency at the task, we've been rewarded with the dirtiest jobs. That," he jabbed holes in the air with his finger in Donovan's direction, "is your work. You've been griping about it, from personal memory, since about five minutes after United States Robots signed you up. Why don't you resign?"
"Well, I'll tell you." Donovan rolled onto his stomach, and took a firm grip on his wild, red hair to hold his head up. "There's a certain principle involved. After all, as a trouble shooter, I've played a part in the development of new robots. There's the principle of aiding scientific advance. But don't get me wrong. It's not the principle that keeps me going; it's the money they pay us. Greg!'
Powell jumped at Donovan's wild shout, and his eyes followed the redhead's to the visiplate, when they goggled in fixed horror. He whispered, "Holy- howling- Jupiter!"
Donovan scrambled breathlessly to his feet, "Look at them, Greg. They've gone nuts."
Powell said, "Get a pair of suits. We're going out there."
He watched the posturings of the robots on the visiplate. They were bronzy gleams of smooth motion against the shadowy crags of the airless asteroid. There was a marching formation now, and in their own dim body light, the roughhewn walls of the mine tunnel swam past noiselessly, checkered with misty erratic blobs of shadow. They marched in unison, seven of them, with Dave at the head. They wheeled and turned in macabre simultaneity; and melted through changes of formation with the weird ease of chorus dancers in Lunar Bowl.
Donovan was back with the suits, "They've gone jingo on us, Greg. That's a military march."
"For all you know," was the cold response, "it may be a series of calisthenic exercises. Or Dave may be under the hallucination of being a dancing master. Just you think first, and don't bother to speak afterward, either."
Donovan scowled and slipped a detonator into the empty side holster with an ostentatious shove. He said, "Anyway, there you are. So we work with new-model robots. It's our job, granted. But answer me one question. Why... why does something invariably go wrong with them?"
"Because," said Powell, somberly, "we are accursed. Let's go!"

Far ahead through the thick velvety blackness of the corridors that reached past the illuminated circles of their flashlights, robot light twinkled.
"There they are," breathed Donovan.
Powell whispered tensely, "I've been trying to get him by radio but he doesn't answer. The radio circuit is probably out."
"Then I'm glad the designers haven't worked out robots who can work in total darkness yet. I'd hate to have to find seven mad robots in a black pit without radio communication, if they weren't lit up like blasted radioactive Christmas trees."
"Crawl up on the ledge above, Mike. They're coming this way, and I want to watch them at close range. Can you make it?"
Donovan made the jump with a grunt. Gravity was considerably below Earth-normal, but with a heavy suit, the advantage was not too great, and the ledge meant a near ten-foot jump. Powell followed.
The column of robots was trailing Dave single-file. In mechanical rhythm, they converted to double and returned to single in different order. It was repeated over and over again and Dave never turned his head.
Dave was within twenty feet when the play-acting ceased. The subsidiary robots broke formation, waited a moment, then clattered off into the distance - very rapidly. Dave looked after them, then slowly sat down. He rested his head in one hand in a very human gesture.
His voice sounded in Powell's earphones, "Are you here, boss?"
Powell beckoned to Donovan and hopped off the ledge.
"O.K., Dave, what's been going on?"
The robot shook his head, "I don't know. One moment I was handling a tough outcropping in Tunnel 17, and the next I was aware of humans close by, and I found myself half a mile down main-stem."
"Where are the subsidiaries now?" asked Donovan.
"Back at work, of course. How much time has been lost?"
"Not much. Forget it." Then to Donovan, Powell added, "Stay with him the rest of the shift. Then, come back. I've got a couple of ideas."

It was three hours before Donovan returned. He looked tired. Powell said, "How did it go?"
Donovan shrugged wearily, "Nothing ever goes wrong when you watch them. Throw me a butt, will you?"
The redhead lit it with exaggerated care and blew a careful smoke ring. He said, "I've been working it out, Greg. You know, Dave has a queer background for a robot. There are six others under him in an extreme regimentation. He's got life and death power over those subsidiary robots and it must react on his mentality. Suppose he finds it necessary to emphasize this power as a concession to his ego."
"Get to the point."
"It's right here. Suppose we have militarism. Suppose he's fashioning himself an army. Suppose- he's training them in military maneuvers. Suppose-"
"Suppose you go soak your head. Your nightmares must be in technicolor. You're postulating a major aberration of the positronic brain. If your analysis were correct, Dave would have to break down the First Law of Robotics: that a robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to be injured. The type of militaristic attitude and domineering ego you propose must have as the end-point of its logical implications, domination of humans."
"All right. How do you know that isn't the fact of the matter?"
"Because any robot with a brain like that would, one, never have left the factory, and two, be spotted immediately if it ever was. I tested Dave, you know."
Powell shoved his chair back and put his feet on the desk. "No. We're still in the position where we can't make our stew because we haven't the slightest notion as to what's wrong. For instance, if we could find out what that dance macabre we witnessed was all about, we would be on the way out."
He paused, "Now listen, Mike, how does this sound to you? Dave goes wrong only when neither of us is present. And when he is wrong, the arrival of either of us snaps him out of it."
"I once told you that was sinister."
"Don't interrupt. How is a robot different when humans are not present? The answer is obvious. There is a larger requirement of personal initiative. In that case, look for the body parts that are affected by the new requirements."
"Golly." Donovan sat up straight, then subsided. "No, no. Not enough. It's too broad. It doesn't cut tie possibilities much."
"Can't help that. In any case, there's no danger of not making quota. We'll take shifts watching those robots through the visor. Any time anything goes wrong, we get to the scene of action immediately. That will put them right."
"But the robots will fail spec anyway, Greg. United States Robots can't market DV models with a report like that."
"Obviously. We've got to locate the error in make-up and correct it - and we've got ten days to do it in." Powell scratched his head. "The trouble is... well, you had better look at the blueprints yourself."
The blueprints covered the floor like a carpet and Donovan crawled over the face of them following Powell's erratic pencil.
Powell said, "Here's where you come in, Mike. You're the body specialist, and I want you to check me. I've been trying to cut out all circuits not involved in the personal initiative hookup. Right here, for instance, is the trunk artery involving mechanical operations. I cut out all routine side routes as emergency divisions-" He looked up, "What do you think?"
Donovan had a very bad taste in his mouth, "The job's not that simple, Greg. Personal initiative isn't an electric circuit you can separate from the rest and study. When a robot is on his own, the intensity of the body activity increases immediately on almost all fronts. There isn't a circuit entirely unafected. What must be done is to locate the particular condition - a very specific condition - that throws him off, and then start eliminating circuits."
Powell got up and dusted himself, "Hmph. All right. Take away the blueprints and burn them."
Donovan said, "You see when activity intensifies, anything can happen, given one single faulty part. Insulation breaks down, a condenser spills over, a connection sparks, a coil overheats. And if you work blind, with the whole robot to choose from, you'll never find the bad spot. If you take Dave apart and test every point of his body mechanism one by one, putting him together each time, and trying him out"
"All right. All right. I can see through a porthole, too."
They faced each other hopelessly, and then Powell said cautiously, "Suppose we interview one of the subsidiaries."
Neither Powell nor Donovan had ever had previous occasion to talk to a "finger." It could talk; it wasn't quite the perfect analogy to a human finger. In fact, it had a fairly developed brain, but that brain was tuned primarily to the reception of orders via positronic field, and its reaction to independent stimuli was rather fumbling.
Nor was Powell certain as to its name. Its serial number was DV-5-2, but that was not very useful.
He compromised. "Look, pal," he said, "I'm going to ask you to do some hard thinking and then you can go back to your boss."
The "finger" nodded its head stiffly, but did not exert its limited brainpower on speech.
"Now on four occasions recently," Powell said, "your boss deviated from brain-scheme. Do you remember those occasions?"
"Yes, sir."
Donovan growled angrily, "He remembers. I tell you there is something very sinister-"
"Oh, go bash your skull. Of course, the 'finger' remembers. There is nothing wrong with him." Powell turned back to the robot, "What were you doing each time... I mean the whole group"
The "finger" had a curious air of reciting by rote, as if he answered questions by the mechanical pressure of his brain pan, but without any enthusiasm whatever.
He said, "The first time we were at work on a difficult outcropping in Tunnel 17, Level B. The second time we were buttressing the roof against a possible cave-in. The third time we were preparing accurate blasts in order to tunnel farther without breaking into a subterranean fissure. The fourth time was just after a minor cave-in"
"What happened at these times?"
"It is difficult to describe. An order would be issued, but before we could receive and interpret it, a new order came to march in queer formation."
Powell snapped out, "Why?"
"I don't know."
Donovan broke in tensely, "What was the first order... the one that was superseded by the marching directions?"
"I don't know. I sensed that an order was sent, but there was never time to receive it."
"Could you tell us anything about it? Was it the same order each time?"
The "finger" shook his head unhappily, "I don't know."
Powell leaned back, "All right, get back to your boss."
The "finger" left, with visible relief.
Donovan said, "Well, we accomplished a lot that time. That was real sharp dialogue all the way through. Listen, Dave and that imbecile 'finger' are both holding out on us. There is too much they don't know and don't remember. We've got to stop trusting them, Greg."
Powell brushed his mustache the wrong way, "So help me, Mike, another fool remark out of you, and I'll take away your rattle and teething ring."
"All right. You're the genius of the team. I'm just a poor sucker. Where do we stand?"
"Right behind the eight ball. I tried to work it backward through the 'finger,' and couldn't. So we've got to work it forward."
"A great man," marveled Donovan. "How simple that makes it. Now translate that into English, Master."
"Translating it into baby talk would suit you better. I mean that we've got to find out what order it is that Dave gives just before everything goes black. It would be the key to the business."
"And how do you expect to do that? We can't get close to him because nothing will go wrong as long as we are there. We can't catch the orders by radio because they are transmitted via this positronic field. That eliminates the closerange and the long-range method, leaving us a neat, cozy zero."
"By direct observation, yes. There's still deduction."
"Huh?"
"We're going on shifts, Mike." Powell smiled grimly. "And we are not taking our eyes off the visiplate. We're going to watch every action of those steel headaches. When they go off into their act, we're going to see what happened immediately before and we're going to deduce the order."
Donovan opened his mouth and left it that way for a full minute. Then he said in strangled tones, "I resign. I quit."
"You have ten days to think up something better," said Powell wearily.
Which, for eight days, Donovan tried mightily to do. For eight days, on alternate four-hour shifts, he watched with aching and bleary eyes those glinty metallic forms move against the vague background. And for eight days in the four-hour in-betweens, he cursed United States Robots, the DV models, and the day he was born.
And then on the eighth day, when Powell entered with an aching head and sleepy eyes for his shift, Donovan stood up and with very careful and deliberate aim launched a heavy book end for the exact center of the visiplate. There was a very appropriate splintering noise.
Powell gasped, "What did you do that for?"
"Because," said Donovan, almost calmly, "I'm not watching it any more. We've got two days left and we haven't found out a thing. DV-5 is a lousy loss. He's stopped five times since I've been watching and three times on your shift, and I can't make out what orders he gave, and you couldn't make it out. And I don't believe you could ever make it out because I know I couldn't ever."
"Jumping Space, how can you watch six robots at the same time? One makes with the hands, and one with the feet and one like a windmill and another is jumping up and down like a maniac. And the other two... devil knows what they are doing. And then they all stop. So! So!"
"Greg, we're not doing it right. We got to get up close. We've got to watch what they're doing from where we can see the details."
Powell broke a bitter silence. "Yeah. and wait for something to go wrong with onlv two davs to go."
"Is it any better watching from here?"
"It's more comfortable."
"Ah- But there's something you can do there that you can't do here."
"What's that?"
"You can make them stop - at whatever time you choose and while you're prepared and watching to see what goes wrong."
Powell startled into alertness, "Howzzat?"
"Well, figure it out, yourself. You're the brains you say. Ask yourself some questions. When does DV-5 go out of whack? When did that 'finger' say he did? When a cave-in threatened, or actually occurred, when delicately measured explosives were being laid down, when a difficult seam was hit."
"In other words, during emergencies," Powell was excited.
"Right! When did you expect it to happen! It's the personal initiative factor that's giving us the trouble. And it's just during emergencies in the absence of a human being that personal initiative is most strained. Now what is the logical deduction? How can we create our own stoppage when and where we want it?" He paused triumphantly - he was beginning to enjoy his role - and answered his own question to forestall the obvious answer on Powell's tongue. "By creating our own emergency."
Powell said, "Mike- you're right."
"Thanks, pal. I knew I'd do it some day."
"All right, and skip the sarcasm. We'll save it for Earth, and preserve it in jars for future long, cold winters. Meanwhile, what emergency can we create?"
"We could flood the mines, if this weren't an airless asteroid."
"A witticism, no doubt," said Powell. "Really, Mike, you'll incapacitate me with laughter. What about a mild cave-in?"
Donovan pursed his lips and said, "O.K. by me."
"Good. Let's get started."
Powell felt uncommonly like a conspirator as he wound his way over the craggy landscape. His sub-gravity walk teetered across the broken ground, kicking rocks to right and left under his weight in noiseless puffs of gray dust. Mentally, though, it was the cautious crawl of the plotter.
He said, "Do you know where they are?"
"I think so, Greg."
"All right," Powell said gloomily, "but if any 'finger' gets within twenty feet of us, we'll be sensed whether we are in the line of sight or not. I hope you know that."
"When I need an elementary course in robotics, I'll file an application with you formally, and in triplicate. Down through here."
They were in the tunnels now; even the starlight was gone. The two hugged the walls, flashes flickering out the way in intermittent bursts. Powell felt for the security of his detonator.
"Do you know this tunnel, Mike?"
"Not so good. It's a new one. I think I can make it out from what I saw in the visiplate, though-"
Interminable minutes passed, and then Mike said, "Feel that!"
There was a slight vibration thrumming the wall against the fingers of Powell's metal-incased hand. There was no sound, naturally.
"Blasting! We're pretty close."
"Keep your eyes open," said Powell.
Donovan nodded impatiently.
It was upon them and gone before they could seize themselves - just a bronze glint across the field of vision. They clung together in silence.
Powell whispered, "Think it sensed us?"
"Hope not. But we'd better flank them. Take the first side tunnel to the right."
"Suppose we miss them altogether?"
"Well what do you want to do? Go back?" Donovan grunted fiercely. "They're within a quarter of a mile. I was watching them through the visiplate, wasn't I? And we've got two days-"
"Oh, shut up. You're wasting your oxygen. Is this a side passage here?" The flash flicked. "It is. Let's go."
The vibration was considerably more marked and the ground below shuddered uneasily.
"This is good," said Donovan, "if it doesn't give out on us, though." He flung his light ahead anxiously.
They could touch the roof of the tunnel with a halfupstretched hand, and the bracings had been newly placed.
Donovan hesitated, "Dead end, let's go back."
"No. Hold on." Powell squeezed clumsily past. "Is that light ahead?"
"Light? I don't see any. Where would there be light down here?"
"Robot light." He was scrambling up a gentle incline on hands and knees. His voice was hoarse and anxious in Donovan's ears. "Hey, Mike, come up here."
There was light. Donovan crawled up and over Powell's outstretched legs. "An opening?"
"Yes. They must be working into this tunnel from the other side now I think."
Donovan felt the ragged edges of the opening that looked out into what the cautious flashlight showed to be a larger and obviously mainstem tunnel. The hole was too small for a man to go through, almost too small for two men to look through simultaneously.
There's nothing there," said Donovan.
"Well, not now. But there must have been a second ago or we wouldn't have seen light. Watch out!"
The walls rolled about them and they felt the impact. A fine dust showered down. Powell lifted a cautious head and looked again. "All right, Mike. They're there."
The glittering robots clustered fifty feet down the main stem. Metal arms labored mightily at the rubbish heap brought down by the last blast.
Donovan urged eagerly, "Don't waste time. It won't be long before they get through, and the next blast may get us."
"For Pete's sake, don't rush me." Powell unlimbered the detonator, and his eyes searched anxiously across the dusky background where the only light was robot light and it was impossible to tell a projecting boulder from a shadow.
"There's a spot in the roof, see it, almost over them. The last blast didn't quite get it. If you can get it at the base, half the roof will cave in."
Powell followed the dim finger, "Check! Now fasten your eye on the robots and pray they don't move too far from that part of the tunnel. They're my light sources. Are all seven there?"
Donovan counted, "All seven."
"Well, then, watch them. Watch every motion!"
His detonator was lifted and remained poised while Donovan watched and cursed and blinked the sweat out of his eye.
It flashed!
There was a jar, a series of hard vibrations, and then a jarring thump that threw Powell heavily against Donovan.
Donovan yowled, "Greg, you threw me off. I didn't see a thing."
Powell stared about wildly, "Where are they?"
Donovan fell into a stupid silence. There was no sign of the robots. It was dark as the depths of the River Styx.
"Think we buried them?" quavered Donovan.
"Let's get down there. Don't ask me what I think." Powell crawled backward at tumbling speed.
"Mike!"
Donovan paused in the act of following. "What's wrong now?"
"Hold on!" Powell's breathing was rough and irregular in Donovan's ears. "Mike! Do you hear me, Mike?"
"I'm right here. What is it?"
"We're blocked in. It wasn't the ceiling coming down fifty feet away that knocked us over. It was our own ceiling. The shock's tumbled it!"
"What!" Donovan scrambled up against a hard barrier. "Turn on the flash."
Powell did so. At no point was there room for a rabbit to squeeze through.
Donovan said softly, "Well, what do you know?"
They wasted a few moments and some muscular power in an effort to move the blocking barrier. Powell varied this by wrenching at the edges of the original hole. For a moment, Powell lifted his blaster. But in those close quarters, a flash would be suicide and he knew it. He sat down.
"You know, Mike," he said, "we've really messed this up. We are no nearer finding out what's wrong with Dave. It was a good idea but it blew up in our face."
Donovan's glance was bitter with an intensity totally wasted on the darkness, "I hate to disturb you, old man, but quite apart from what we know or don't know of Dave, we're slightly trapped. If we don't get loose, fella, we're going to die. D-I-E, die. How much oxygen have we anyway? Not more than six hours."
"I've thought of that." Powell's fingers went up to his long-suffering mustache and clanged uselessly against the transparent visor. "Of course, we could get Dave to dig us out easily in that time, except that our precious emergency must have thrown him off, and his radio circuit is out."
"And isn't that nice?"
Donovan edged up to the opening and managed to get his metalincased head out. It was an extremely tight fit.
"Hey, Greg!"
"What?"
"Suppose we get Dave within twenty feet. He'll snap to normal. That will save us."
"Sure, but where is he?"
"Down the corridor - way down. For Pete's sake, stop pulling before you drag my head out of its socket. I'll give you your chance to look."
Powell maneuvered his head outside, "We did it all right. Look at those saps. That must be a ballet they're doing."
"Never mind the side remarks. Are they getting any closer?"
"Can't tell yet. They're too far away. Give me a chance. Pass me my flash, will you? I'll try to attract their attention that way."
He gave up after two minutes, "Not a chance! They must be blind. Uhoh, they're starting toward us. What do you know?"
Donovan said, "Hey, let me see!"
There was a silent scuffle. Powell said, "All right!" and Donovan got his head out.
They were approaching. Dave was high-stepping the way in front and the six "fingers" were a weaving chorus line behind him.
Donovan marveled, "What are they doing? That's what I want to know. It looks like the Virginia reel - and Dave's a major-domo, or I never saw one."
"Oh, leave me alone with your descriptions," grumbled Powell. "How near are they?"
"Within fifty feet and coming this way. We'll be out in fifteen minUh-huh-HUH-HEY-Y!"
"What's going on?" It took Powell several seconds to recover from his stunned astonishment at Donovan's vocal gyrations. "Come on, give me a chance at that hole. Don't be a hog about it."
He fought his way upward, but Donovan kicked wildly, "They did an about-face, Greg. They're leaving. Davel Hey, Da-a ave!"
Powell shrieked, "What's the use of that, you fool? Sound won't carry."
"Well, then," panted Donovan, "kick the walls, slam them, get some vibration started. We've got to attract their attention somehow, Greg, or we're through. " He pounded like a madman.
Powell shook him, "Wait, Mike, wait. Listen, I've got an idea. Jumping Jupiter, this is a fine time to get around to the simple solutions. Mike!"
"What do you want?" Donovan pulled his head in.
"Let me in there fast before they get out of range."
"Out of range! What are you going to do? Hey, what are you going to do with that detonator?" He grabbed Powell's arm.
Powell shook off the grip violently. "I'm going to do a little shooting."
"Why?"
"That's for later. Let's see if it works first. If it doesn't, then- Get out of the way and let me shoot!"
The robots were flickers, small and getting smaller, in the distance. Powell lined up the sights tensely, and pulled the trigger three times. He lowered the guns and peered anxiously. One of the subsidiaries was down! There were only six gleaming figures now.
Powell called into his transmitter uncertainly. "Dave!"
A pause, then the answer sounded to both men, "Boss? Where are you? My third subsidiary has had his chest blown in. He's out of commission."
"Never mind your subsidiary," said Powell. "We're trapped in a cave-in where you were blasting. Can you see our flashlight?"
"Sure. We'll be right there."
Powell sat back and relaxed, "That, my fran', is that"
Donovan said very softly with tears in his voice, "All right, Greg. You win. I beat my forehead against the ground before your feet. Now don't feed me any bull. Just tell me quietly what it's all about."
"Easy. It's just that all through we missed the obvious - as usual. We knew it was the personal initiative circuit, and that it always happened during emergencies, but we kept looking for a specific order as the cause. Why should it be an order?"
"Why not?"
"Well, look. Why not a type of order. What type of order requires the most initiative? What type of order would occur almost always only in an emergency?"
"Don't ask me, dreg. Tell me!"
"I'm doing it! It's the six-way order. Under all ordinary conditions, one or more of the `fingers' would be doing routine tasks requiring no close supervision - in the sort of offhand way our bodies handle the routine walking motions. But in an emergency, all six subsidiaries must be mobilized immediately and simultaneously. Dave must handle six robots at a time and something gives. The rest was easy. Any decrease in initiative required, such as the arrival of humans, snaps him back. So I destroyed one of the robots. When I did, he was transmitting only five-way orders. Initiative decreases - he's normal"
"How did you get all that?" demanded Donovan.
"Just logical guessing. I tried it and it worked."
The robot's voice was in their ears again, "Here I am. Can you hold out half an hour?"
"Easy!" said Powell. Then, to Donovan, he continued, "And now the job should be simple. We'll go through the circuits, and check off each part that gets an extra workout in a six-way order as against a five-way. How big a field does that leave us?"
Donovan considered, "Not much, I think. If Dave is like the preliminary model we saw back at the factory, there's a special coordinating circuit that would be the only section involved." He cheered up suddenly and amazingly, "Say, that wouldn't be bad at all. There's nothing to that."
"All right. You think it over and we'll check the blueprints when we get back. And now, till Daves reaches us, I'm relaxing."
"Hey, wait! Just tell me one thing. What were those queer shifting marches, those funny dance steps, that the robots went through every time they went screwy?"
"That? I don't know. But I've got a notion. Remember, those subsidiaries were Dave's 'fingers.' We were always saying that, you know. Well, it's my idea that in all these interludes, whenever Dave became a psychiatric case, he went off into a moronic maze, spending his time _twiddling his fingers_."

Susan Calvin talked about Powell and Donovan with unsmiling amusement, but warmth came into her voice when she mentioned robots. It didn't take her long to go through the Speedies, the Cuties and the Daves, and I stopped her. Otherwise, she would have dredged up half a dozen more.
I said, "Doesn't anything ever happen on Earth?"
She looked at me with a little frown, "No, we don't have much to do with robots in action here on Earth."
"Oh, well that's too bad. I mean, your field-engineers are swell, but can't we get you into this? Didn't you ever have a robot go wrong on you? It's your anniversary, you know."
And so help me she blushed. She said, "Robots have gone wrong on me. Heavens, how long it's been since I thought of it. Why, it was almost forty years ago. Certainlyl 2021! And I was only thirty-eight. Oh, my- I'd rather not talk about it."
I waited, and sure enough she changed her mind. "Why not?" she said. "It cannot harm me now. Even the memory can't. I was foolish once, young man. Would you believe that?"
"No," I said.
"I was. But Herbie was a mind-reading robot."
"What?"
"Only one of its kind, before or since. A mistake,-,somewheres-"

---
Liar!
---
ALFRED LANNING LIT HIS CIGAR CAREFULLY, BUT the tips of his fingers were trembling slightly. His gray eyebrows hunched low as he spoke between puffs.
"It reads minds all right-damn little doubt about that! But why?" He looked at Mathematician Peter Bogert, "Well?"
Bogert flattened his black hair down with both hands, "That was the thirty-fourth RB model we've turned out, Lanning. All the others were strictly orthodox."
The third man at the table frowned. Milton Ashe was the youngest officer of U. S. Robot & Mechanical Men, Inc., and proud of his post.
"Listen, Bogert. There wasn't a hitch in the assembly from start to finish. I guarantee that."
Bogert's thick lips spread in a patronizing smile, "Do you? If you can answer for the entire assembly line, I recommend your promotion. By exact count, there are seventy-five thousand, two hundred and thirtyfour operations necessary for the manufacture of a single positronic brain, each separate operation depending for successful completion upon any number of factors, from five to a hundred and five. If any one of them goes seriously wrong, the `brain' is ruined. I quote our own information folder, Ashe."
Milton Ashe flushed, but a fourth voice cut off his reply.
"If we're going to start by trying to fix the blame on one another, I'm leaving." Susan Calvin's hands were folded tightly in her lap, and the little lines about her thin, pale lips deepened, "We've got a mind-reading robot on our hands and it strikes me as rather important that we find out just why it reads minds. We're not going to do that by saying, `Your fault! My fault!' "
Her cold gray eyes fastened upon Ashe, and he grinned.
Lanning grinned too, and, as always at such times, his long white hair and shrewd little eyes made him the picture of a biblical patriarch, "True for you, Dr. Calvin."
His voice became suddenly crisp, "Here's everything in pill-concentrate form. We've produced a positronic brain of supposedly ordinary vintage that's got the remarkable property of being able to tune in on thought waves. It would mark the most important advance in robotics in decades, if we knew how it happened. We don't, and we have to find out. Is that clear?"
"May I make a suggestion?" asked Bogert.
"Go ahead!"
"I'd say that until we do figure out the mess -and as a mathematician I expect it to be a very devil of a mess- we keep the existence of RD-34 a secret. I mean even from the other members of the staff. As heads of the departments, we ought not to find it an insoluble problem, and the fewer know about it-"
"Bogert is right," said Dr. Calvin. "Ever since the Interplanetary Code was modified to allow robot models to be tested in the plants before being shipped out to space, antirobot propaganda has increased. If any word leaks out about a robot being able to read minds before we can announce complete control of the phenomenon, pretty effective capital could be made out of it."
Lanning sucked at his cigar and nodded gravely. He turned to Ashe, "I think you said you were alone when you first stumbled on this thought-reading business."
"I'll say I was alone- I got the scare of my life. RB-34 had just been taken off the assembly table and they sent him down to me. Obermann was off somewheres, so I took him down to the testing rooms myself- at least I started to take him down." Ashe paused, and a tiny smile tugged at his lips, "Say, did any of you ever carry on a thought conversation without knowing it?"
No one bothered to answer, and he continued, "You don't realize it at first, you know. He just spoke to me - as logically and sensibly as you can imagine - and it was only when I was most of the way down to the testing rooms that I realized that I hadn't said anything. Sure, I thought lots, but that isn't the same thing, is it? I locked that thing up and ran for Lanning. Having it walking beside me, calmly peering into my thoughts and picking and choosing among them gave me the willies."
"I imagine it would," said Susan Calvin thoughtfully. Her eyes fixed themselves upon Ashe in an oddly intent manner. "We are so accustomed to considering our own thoughts private."
Lanning broke in impatiently, "Then only the four of us know. All right! We've got to go about this systematically. Ashe, I want you to check over the assembly line from beginning to end -everything. You're to eliminate all operations in which there was no possible chance of an error, and list all those where there were, together with its nature and possible magnitude."
"Tall order," grunted Ashe.
"Naturally! Of course, you're to put the men under you to work on this  - every single one if you have to, and I don't care if we go behind schedule, either. But they're not to know why, you understand."
"Hm-m-m, yes!" The young technician grinned wryly. "It's still a lulu of a job."
Lanning swiveled about in his chair and faced Calvin, "You'll have to tackle the job from the other direction. You're the robo-psychologist of the plant, so you're to study the robot itself and work backward. Try to find out how he ticks. See what else is tied up with his telepathic powers, how far they extend, how they warp his outlook, and just exactly what harm it has done to his ordinary RB properties. You've got that?"
Lanning didn't wait for Dr. Calvin to answer.
"I'll co-ordinate the work and interpret the findings mathematically." He puffed violently at his cigar and mumbled the rest through the smoke, "Bogert will help me there, of course."
Bogert polished the nails of one pudgy hand with the other and said blandly, "I dare say. I know a little in the line."
"Well! I'll get started." Ashe shoved his chair back and rose. His pleasantly youthful face crinkled in a grin, "I've got the darnedest job of any of us, so I'm getting out of here and to work."
He left with a slurred, "B' seein' ye!"
Susan Calvin answered with a barely perceptible nod, but her eyes followed him out of sight and she did not answer when Lanning grunted and said, "Do you want to go up and see RB-34 now, Dr. Calvin?"

RB-34's photoelectric eyes lifted from the book at the muffled sound of binges turning and he was upon his feet when Susan Calvin entered.
She paused to readjust the huge "No Entrance" sign upon the door and then approached the robot.
"I've brought you the texts upon hyperatomic motors, Herbie - a few anyway. Would you care to look at them?"
RB-34 -otherwise known as Herbie- lifted the three heavy books from her arms and opened to the title page of one:
"Hm-m-m! 'Theory of Hyperatomics.' " He mumbled inarticulately to himself as he flipped the pages and then spoke with an abstracted air, "Sit down, Dr. Calvin! This will take me a few minutes."
The psychologist seated herself and watched Herbie narrowly as he took a chair at the other side of the table and went through the three books systematically.
At the end of half an hour, he put them down, "Of course, I know why you brought these."
The corner of Dr. Calvin's lip twitched, "I was afraid you would. It's difficult to work with you, Herbie. You're always a step ahead of me."
"It's the same with these books, you know, as with the others. They just don't interest me. There's nothing to your textbooks. Your science is just a mass of collected data plastered together by make-shift theory - and all so incredibly simple, that it's scarcely worth bothering about.
"It's your fiction that interests me. Your studies of the interplay of human motives and emotions" - his mighty hand gestured vaguely as he sought the proper words.
Dr. Calvin whispered, "I think I understand."
"I see into minds, you see," the robot continued, "and you have no idea how complicated they are. I can't begin to understand everything because my own mind has so little in common with them - but I try, and your novels help."
"Yes, but I'm afraid that after going through some of the harrowing emotional experiences of our present-day sentimental novel" - there was a tinge of bitterness in her voice - "you find real minds like ours dull and colorless."
"But I don't!"
The sudden energy in the response brought the other to her feet. She felt herself reddening, and thought wildly, "He must know!"
Herbie subsided suddenly, and muttered in a low voice from which the metallic timbre departed almost entirely. "But, of course, I know about it, Dr. Calvin. You think of it always, so how can I help but know?"
Her face was hard. "Have you - told anyone?"
"Of course not!" This, with genuine surprise. "No one has asked me."
"Well, then," she flung out, "I suppose you think I am a fool."
"No! It is a normal emotion."
"Perhaps that is why it is so foolish." The wistfulness in her voice drowned out everything else. Some of the woman peered through the layer of doctorhood. "I am not what you would call - attractive."
"If you are referring to mere physical attraction, I couldn't judge. But I know, in any case, that there are other types of attraction."
"Nor young." Dr. Calvin had scarcely heard the robot.
"You are not yet forty." An anxious insistence had crept into Herbie's voice.
"Thirty-eight as you count the years; a shriveled sixty as far as my emotional outlook on life is concerned. Am I a psychologist for nothing?"
She drove on with bitter breathlessness, "And he's barely thirty-five and looks and acts younger. Do you suppose he ever sees me as anything but... but what I am?"
"You are wrong!" Herbie's steel fist struck the plastictopped table with a strident clang. "Listen to me-"
But Susan Calvin whirled on him now and the hunted pain in her eyes became a blaze, "Why should I? What do you know about it all, anyway, you... you machine. I'm just a specimen to you; an interesting bug with a peculiar mind spread-eagled for inspection. It's a wonderful example of frustration, isn't it? Almost as good as your books." Her voice, emerging in dry sobs, choked into silence.
The robot cowered at the outburst. He shook his head pleadingly. "Won't you listen to me, please? I could help you if you would let me."
"How?" Her lips curled. "By giving me good advice?"
"No, not that. It's just that I know what other people think - Milton Ashe, for instance."
There was a long silence, and Susan Calvin's eyes dropped. "I don't want to know what he thinks," she gasped. "Keep quiet."
"I think you would want to know what he thinks"
Her head remained bent, but her breath came more quickly. "You are talking nonsense," she whispered.
"Why should I? I am trying to help. Milton Ashe's thoughts of you-" he paused.
And then the psychologist raised her head, "Well?"
The robot said quietly, "He loves you."

For a full minute, Dr. Calvin did not speak. She merely stared. Then, "You are mistaken! You must be. Why should he?"
"But he does. A thing like that cannot be hidden, not from me."
"But I am so... so- "she stammered to a halt.
"He looks deeper than the skin, and admires intellect in others. Milton Ashe is not the type to marry a head of hair and a pair of eyes."
Susan Calvin found herself blinking rapidly and waited before speaking. Even then her voice trembled, "Yet he certainly never in any way indicated-"
"Have you ever given him a chance?"
"How could I? I never thought that-"
"Exactly!"
The psychologist paused in thought and then looked up suddenly. "A girl visited him here at the plant half a year ago. She was pretty, I suppose - blond and slim. And, of course, could scarcely add two and two. He spent all day puffing out his chest, trying to explain how a robot was put together." The hardness had returned, "Not that she understood! Who was she?"
Herbie answered without hesitation, "I know the person you are referring to. She is his first cousin, and there is no romantic interest there, I assure you."
Susan Calvin rose to her feet with a vivacity almost girlish. "Now isn't that strange? That's exactly what I used to pretend to myself sometimes, though I never really thought so. Then it all must be true."
She ran to Herbie and seized his cold, heavy hand in both hers. "Thank you, Herbie." Her voice was an urgent, husky whisper. "Don't tell anyone about this. Let it be our secret - and thank you again." With that, and a convulsive squeeze of Herbie's unresponsive metal fingers, she left.
Herbie turned slowly to his neglected novel, but there was no one to read his thoughts.

Milton Ashe stretched slowly and magnificently, to the tune of cracking joints and a chorus of grunts, and then glared at Peter Bogert, Ph.D.
"Say," he said, "I've been at this for a week now with just about no sleep. How long do I have to keep it up? I thought you said the positronic bombardment in Vac Chamber D was the solution."
Bogert yawned delicately and regarded his white hands with interest. "It is. I'm on the track."
"I know what that means when a mathematician says it. How near the end are you?"
"It all depends."
"On what?" Ashe dropped into a chair and stretched his long legs out before him.
"On Lanning. The old fellow disagrees with me." He sighed, "A bit behind the times, that's the trouble with him. He clings to matrix mechanics as the all in all, and this problem calls for more powerful mathematical tools. He's so stubborn."
Ashe muttered sleepily, "Why not ask Herbie and settle the whole affair?"
"Ask the robot?" Bogert's eyebrows climbed.
"Why not? Didn't the old girl tell you?"
"You mean Calvin?"
"Yeah! Susie herself. That robot's a mathematical wiz. He knows all about everything plus a bit on the side. He does triple integrals in his head and eats up tensor analysis for dessert."
The mathematician stared skeptically, "Are you serious?"
"So help me! The catch is that the dope doesn't like math. He would rather read slushy novels. Honest! You should see the tripe Susie keeps feeding him: 'Purple Passion' and 'Love in Space.' "
"Dr. Calvin hasn't said a word of this to us."
"Well, she hasn't finished studying him. You know how she is. She likes to have everything just so before letting out the big secret."
"She's told you."
"We sort of got to talking. I have been seeing a lot of her lately." He opened his eyes wide and frowned, "Say, Bogie, have you been noticing anything queer about the lady lately?"
Bogert relaxed into an undignified grin, "She's using lipstick, if that's what you mean."
"Hell, I know that. Rouge, powder and eye shadow, too. She's a sight. But it's not that. I can't put my finger on it. It's the way she talks - as if she were happy about something." He thought a little, and then shrugged.
The other allowed himself a leer, which, for a scientist past fifty, was not a bad job, "Maybe she's in love."
Ashe allowed his eyes to close again, "You're nuts, Bogie. You go speak to Herbie; I want to stay here and go to sleep."
"Right! Not that I particularly like having a robot tell me my job, nor that I think he can do it!"
A soft snore was his only answer.
Herbie listened carefully as Peter Bogert, hands in pockets, spoke with elaborate indifference.
"So there you are. I've been told you understand these things, and I am asking you more in curiosity than anything else. My line of reasoning, as I have outlined it, involves a few doubtful steps, I admit, which Dr. Lanning refuses to accept, and the picture is still rather incomplete."
The robot didn't answer, and Bogert said, "Well?"
"I see no mistake," Herbie studied the scribbled figures.
"I don't suppose you can go any further than that?"
"I daren't try. You are a better mathematician than I, and - well, I'd hate to commit myself."
There was a shade of complacency in Bogert's smile, "I rather thought that would be the case. It is deep. We'll forget it." He crumpled the sheets, tossed them down the waste shaft, turned to leave, and then thought better of it.
"By the way-"
The robot waited.
Bogert seemed to have difficulty. "There is something -that is, perhaps you can-" He stopped.
Herbie spoke quietly. "Your thoughts are confused, but there is no doubt at all that they concern Dr. Lanning. It is silly to hesitate, for as soon as you compose yourself, I'll know what it is you want to ask."
The mathematician's hand went to his sleek hair in the familiar smoothing gesture. "Lanning is nudging seventy," he said, as if that explained everything.
"I know that."
"And he's been director of the plant for almost thirty years." Herbie nodded.
"Well, now," Bogert's voice became ingratiating, "you would know whether... whether he's thinking of resigning. Health, perhaps, or some other-"
"Quite," said Herbie, and that was all.
"Well, do you know?"
"Certainly."
"Then-uh-could you tell me?"
"Since you ask, yes." The robot was quite matter-of-fact about it. "He has already resigned!"
"What!" The exclamation was an explosive, almost inarticulate, sound. The scientist's large head hunched forward, "Say that again!"
"He has already resigned," came the quiet repetition, "but it has not yet taken effect. He is waiting, you see, to solve the problem of -er - myself. That finished, he is quite ready to turn the office of director over to his successor."
Bogert expelled his breath sharply, "And this successor? Who is he?" He was quite close to Herbie now, eyes fixed fascinatedly on those unreadable dull-red photoelectric cells that were the robot's eyes.
Words came slowly, "You are the next director."
And Bogert relaxed into a tight smile, "This is good to know. I've been hoping and waiting for this. Thanks, Herbie."
Peter Bogert was at his desk until five that morning and he was back at nine. The shelf just over the desk emptied of its row of reference books and tables, as he referred to one after the other. The pages of calculations before him increased microscopically and the crumpled sheets at his feet mounted into a hill of scribbled paper.
At precisely noon, he stared at the final page, rubbed a blood-shot eye, yawned and shrugged. "This is getting worse each minute. Damn!"
He turned at the sound of the opening door and nodded at Lanning, who entered, cracking the knuckles of one gnarled hand with the other.
The director took in the disorder of the room and his eyebrows furrowed together.
"New lead?" he asked.
"No," came the defiant answer. "What's wrong with the old one?"
Lanning did not trouble to answer, nor to do more than bestow a single cursory glance at the top sheet upon Bogert's desk. He spoke through the flare of a match as he lit a cigar.
"Has Calvin told you about the robot? It's a mathematical genius. Really remarkable."
The other snorted loudly, "So I've heard. But Calvin had better stick to robopsychology. I've checked Herbie on math, and he can scarcely struggle through calculus."
"Calvin didn't find it so."
"She's crazy."
"And I don't find it so." The director's eyes narrowed dangerously.
"You!" Bogert's voice hardened. "What are you talking about?"
"I've been putting Herbie through his paces all morning, and he can do tricks you never heard of."
"Is that so?"
"You sound skeptical!" Lanning flipped a sheet of paper out of his vest pocket and unfolded it. "That's not my handwriting, is it?"
Bogert studied the large angular notation covering the sheet, "Herbie did this?"
"Right! And if you'll notice, he's been working on your time integration of Equation 22. It comes" -Lanning tapped a yellow fingernail upon the last step- "to the identical conclusion I did, and in a quarter the time. You had no right to neglect the Linger Effect in positronic bombardment."
"I didn't neglect it. For Heaven's sake, Lanning, get it through your head that it would cancel out-"
"Oh, sure, you explained that. You used the Mitchell Translation Equation, didn't you? Well - it doesn't apply."
"Why not?"
"Because you've been using hyper-imaginaries, for one thing."
"What's that to do with?"
"Mitchell's Equation won't hold when-"
"Are you crazy? If you'll reread Mitchell's original paper in the Transactions of the Far-"
"I don't have to. I told you in the beginning that I didn't like his reasoning, and Herbie backs me in that."
"Well, then," Bogert shouted, "let that clockwork contraption solve the entire problem for you. Why bother with nonessentials?"
"That's exactly the point. Herbie can't solve the problem. And if he can't, we can't - alone. I'm submitting the entire question to the National Board. It's gotten beyond us."
Bogert's chair went over backward as he jumped up a-snarl, face crimson. "You're doing nothing of the sort."
Lanning flushed in his turn, "Are you telling me what I can't do?"
"Exactly," was the gritted response. "I've got the problem beaten and you're not to take it out of my hands, understand? Don't think I don't see through you, you desiccated fossil. You'd cut your own nose off before you'd let me get the credit for solving robotic telepathy."
"You're a damned idiot, Bogert, and in one second I'll have you suspended for insubordination" - Lanning's lower lip trembled with passion.
"Which is one thing you won't do, Lanning. You haven't any secrets with a mind-reading robot around, so don't forget that I know all about your resignation."
The ash on Lanning's cigar trembled and fell, and the cigar itself followed, "What... what-"
Bogert chuckled nastily, "And I'm the new director, be it understood. I'm very aware of that; don't think I'm not. Damn your eyes, Lanning, I'm going to give the orders about here or there will be the sweetest mess that you've ever been in."
Lanning found his voice and let it out with a roar. "You're suspended, d'ye hear? You're relieved of all duties. You're broken, do you understand?"
The smile on the other's face broadened, "Now, what's the use of that? You're getting nowhere. I'm holding the trumps. I know you've resigned. Herbie told me, and he got it straight from you."
Lanning forced himself to speak quietly. He looked an old, old man, with tired eyes peering from a face in which the red had disappeared, leaving the pasty yellow of age behind, "I want to speak to Herbie. He can't have told you anything of the sort. You're playing a deep game, Bogert, but I'm calling your bluff. Come with me."
Bogert shrugged, "To see Herbie? Good! Damned good!"

It was also precisely at noon that Milton Ashe looked up from his clumsy sketch and said, "You get the idea? I'm not too good at getting this down, but that's about how it looks. It's a honey of a house, and I can get it for next to nothing."
Susan Calvin gazed across at him with melting eyes. "It's really beautiful," she sighed. "I've often thought that I'd like to-" Her voice trailed away.
"Of course," Ashe continued briskly, putting away his pencil, "I've got to wait for my vacation. It's only two weeks off, but this Herbie business has evervthing up in the air." His eyes dropped to his fingernails, "Besides, there's another point - but it's a secret."
"Then don't tell me."
"Oh, I'd just as soon, I'm just busting to tell someone - and you're just about the best -er- confidante I could find here." He grinned sheepishly.
Susan Calvin's heart bounded, but she did not trust herself to speak.
"Frankly," Ashe scraped his chair closer and lowered his voice into a confidential whisper, "the house isn't to be only for myself. I'm getting married!"
And then he jumped out of his seat, "What's the matter?"
"Nothing!" The horrible spinning sensation had vanished, but it was hard to get words out. "Married? You mean-"
"Why, sure! About time, isn't it? You remember that girl who was here last summer. That's she! But you are sick. You-"
"Headache!" Susan Calvin motioned him away weakly. "I've... I've been subject to them lately. I want to... to congratulate you, of course. I'm very glad-" The inexpertly applied rouge made a pair of nasty red splotches upon her chalk-white face. Things had begun spinning again. "Pardon me- please-"
The words were a mumble, as she stumbled blindly out the door. It had happened with the sudden catastrophe of a dream - and with all the unreal horror of a dream.
But how could it be? Herbie had said-
And Herbie knew! He could see into minds!
She found herself leaning breathlessly against the door jamb, staring into Herbie's metal face. She must have climbed the two flights of stairs, but she had no memory of it. The distance had been covered in an instant, as in a dream.
As in a dream!
And still Herbie's unblinking eyes stared into hers and their dull red seemed to expand into dimly shining nightmarish globes.
He was speaking, and she felt the cold glass pressing against her lips. She swallowed and shuddered into a pertain awareness of her surroundings.
Still Herbie spoke, and there was agitation in his voice - as if he were hurt and frightened and pleading.
The words were beginning to make sense. "This is a dream," he was saying, "and you mustn't believe in it. You'll wake into the real world soon and laugh at yourself. He loves you, I tell you. He does, he does! But not here! Not now! This is an illusion."
Susan Calvin nodded, her voice a whisper, "Yes! Yes!" She was clutching Herbie's arm, clinging to it, repeating over and over, "It isn't true, is it? It isn't, is it?"
Just how she came to her senses, she never knew - but it was like passing from a world of misty unreality to one of harsh sunlight. She pushed him away from her, pushed hard against that steely arm, and her eyes were wide.
"What are you trying to do?" Her voice rose to a harsh scream. "What are you trying to do?"
Herbie backed away, "I want to help"
The psychologist stared, "Help? By telling me this is a dream? By trying to push me into schizophrenia?" A hysterical tenseness seized her, "This is no dream! I wish it were!"
She drew her breath sharply, "Wait! Why... why, I understand. Merciful Heavens, it's so obvious."
There was horror in the robot's voice, "I had to!"
"And I believed youl I never thought-"
Loud voices outside the door brought her to a halt. She turned away, fists clenching spasmodically, and when Bogert and Lanning entered, she was at the far window. Neither of the men paid her the slightest attention.
They approached Herbie simultaneously; Lanning angry and impatient, Bogert, coolly sardonic. The director spoke first.
"Here now, Herbie. Listen to me!"
The robot brought his eyes sharply down upon the aged director, "Yes, Dr. Lanning."
"Have you discussed me with Dr. Bogert?"
"No, sir." The answer came slowly, and the smile on Bogert's face flashed off.
"What's that?" Bogert shoved in ahead of his superior and straddled the ground before the robot. "Repeat what you told me yesterday."
"I said that " Herbie fell silent. Deep within him his metallic diaphragm vibrated in soft discords.
"Didn't you say he had resigned?" roared Bogert. "Answer me!"
Bogert raised his arm frantically, but Lanning pushed him aside, "Are you trying to bully him into lying?"
"You heard him, Lanning. He began to say 'Yes' and stopped. Get out of my way! I want the truth out of him, understandl"
"I'll ask him!" Lanning turned to the robot. "All right, Herbie, take it easy. Have I resigned?"
Herbie stared, and Lanning repeated anxiously, "Have I resigned?" There was the faintest trace of a negative shake of the robot's head. A long wait produced nothing further.
The two men looked at each other and the hostility in their eyes was all but tangible.
"What the devil," blurted Bogert, "has the robot gone mute? Can't you speak, you monstrosity?"
"I can speak," came the ready answer.
"Then answer the question. Didn't you tell me Lanning had resigned? Hasn't he resigned'
And again there was nothing but dull silence, until from the end of the room, Susan Calvin's laugh rang out suddenly, high-pitched and semi-hysterical.
The two mathematicians jumped, and Bogerts eyes narrowed, "You here? What's so funny?"
"Nothing's funny." Her voice was not quite natural. "It's just that I'm not the only one that's been caught. There's irony in three of the greatest experts in robotics in the world falling into the same elementary trap, isn't there?" Her voice faded, and she put a pale hand to her forehead, "But it isn't funny!"
This time the look that passed between the two men was one of raised eyebrows. "What trap are you talking about?" asked Lansing stiffly. "Is something wrong with Herbie?"
"No," she approached them slowly, "nothing is wrong with him - only with us." She whirled suddenly and shrieked at the robot, "Get away from me! Go to the other end of the room and don't let me look at you."
Herbie cringed before the fury of her eyes and stumbled away in a clattering trot.
Lanning's voice was hostile, "What is all this, Dr. Calvin?"
She faced them and spoke sarcastically, "Surely you know the fundamental First Law of Robotics."
The other two nodded together. "Certainly," said Bogert, Irritably, "a robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow him to come to harm"
"How nicely put," sneered Calvin. "But what kind of harm?"
"Why - any kind."
"Exactly! Any kind! But what about hurt feelings? What about deflation of one's ego? What about the blasting of one's hopes? Is that injury?"
Lanning frowned, "What would a robot know about-" And then he caught himself with a gasp.
"You've caught on, have you? This robot reads minds. Do you suppose it doesn't know everything about mental injury? Do you suppose that if asked a question, it wouldn't give exactly that answer that one wants to hear? Wouldn't any other answer hurt us, and wouldn't Herbie know that?"
"Good Heavens!" muttered Bogert.
The psychologist cast a sardonic glance at him, "I take it you asked him whether Lanning had resigned. You wanted to hear that he had resigned and so that's what Herbie told you."
"And I suppose that is why," said Lanning, tonelessly, "it would not answer a little while ago. It couldn't answer either way without hurting one of us."
There was a short pause in which the men looked thoughtfully across the room at the robot, crouching in the chair by the bookcase, head resting in one hand.
Susan Calvin stared steadfastly at the floor, "He knew of all this. That... that devil knows everything - including what went wrong in his assembly." Her eyes were dark and brooding.
Lanning looked up, "You're wrong there, Dr. Calvin. He doesn't know what went wrong. I asked him."
"What does that mean?" cried Calvin. "Only that you didn't want him to give you the solution. It would puncture your ego to have a machine do what you couldn't. Did you ask him?" she shot at Bogert.
"In a way." Bogert coughed and reddened. "He told me he knew very little about mathematics."
Lanning laughed, not very loudly and the psychologist smiled caustically. She said, "I'll ask him! A solution by him won't hurt my ego" She raised her voice into a cold, imperative, "Come here!"
Herbie rose and approached with hesitant steps.
"You know, I suppose," she continued, "just exactly at what point in the assembly an extraneous factor was introduced or an essential one left out."
"Yes," said Herbie, in tones barely heard.
"Hold on," broke in Bogert angrily. "That's not necessary true. You want to hear that, that's all."
"Don't be a fool," replied Calvin. "He certainly knows as much math as you and Lanning together, since he can read minds. Give him his chance."
The mathematician subsided, and Calvin continued, "All right, then, Herbie, give! We're waiting." And in an aside, "Get pencils and paper, gentlemen."
But Herbie remained silent, and there was triumph in the psychologist's voice, "Why don't you answer, Herbie?"
The robot blurted out suddenly, "I cannot. You know I cannot! Dr. Bogert and Dr. Lanning don't want me to."
"They want the solution."
"But not from me."
Lanning broke in, speaking slowly and distinctly, "Don't be foolish, Herbie. We do want you to tell us."
Bogert nodded curtly.
Herbie's voice rose to wild heights, "What's the use of saying that? Don't you suppose that I can see past the superficial skin of your mind? Down below, you don't want me to. I'm a machine, given the imitation of life only by virtue of the positronic interplay in my brain-which is man's device. You can't lose face to me without being hurt. That is deep in your mind and won't be erased. I can't give the solution."
"We'll leave," said Dr. Lanning. "Tell Calvin."
"That would make no difference," cried Herbie, "since you would know anyway that it was I that was supplying the answer."
Calvin resumed, "But you understand, Herbie, that despite that, Drs. Lanning and Bogert want that solution."
"By their own efforts!" insisted Herbie.
"But they want it, and the fact that you have it and won't give it hurts them. You see that, don't you?"
"Yes! Yes!"
"And if you tell them that will hurt them, too"
"Yes! Yes!" Herbie was retreating slowly, and step by step Susan Calvin advanced. The two men watched in frozen bewilderment.
"You can't tell them," droned the psychologist slowly, "because that would hurt and you mustn't hurt. But if you don't tell them, you hurt, so you must tell them. And if you do, you will hurt and you mustn't, so you can't tell them; but if you don't, you hurt, so you must; but if you do, you hurt, so you mustn't; but if you don't, you hurt, so you must; but if you do, you-"
Herbie was up against the wall, and here he dropped to his knees. "Stop!" he shrieked. "Close your mind! It is full of pain and frustration and hate! I didn't mean it, I tell you! I tried to help! I told you what you wanted to hear. I had to!"
The psychologist paid no attention. "You must tell them, but if you do, you hurt, so you mustn't; but if you don't, you hurt, so you must; but-"
And Herbie screamed!
It was like the whistling of a piccolo many times magnified - shrill and shriller till it keened with the terror of a lost soul and filled the room with the piercingness of itself.
And when it died into nothingness, Herbie collapsed into a huddled heap of motionless metal.
Bogert's face was bloodless, "He's dead!"
"No!" Susan Calvin burst into body-racking gusts of wild laughter, "not dead - merely insane. I confronted him with the insoluble dilemma, and he broke down. You can scrap him now-because he'll never speak again."
Lanning was on his knees beside the thing that had been Herbie. His fingers touched the cold, unresponsive metal face and he shuddered. "You did that on purpose." He rose and faced her, face contorted.
"What if I did? You can't help it now." And in a sudden access of bitterness, "He deserved it."
The director seized the paralysed, motionless Bogert by the wrist, "What's the difference. Come, Peter." He sighed, "A thinking robot of this type is worthless anyway." His eyes were old and tired, and he repeated, "Come, Peter!"
It was minutes after the two scientists left that Dr. Susan Calvin regained part of her mental equilibrium. Slowly, her eyes turned to the living-dead Herbie and the tightness returned to her face. Long she stared while the triumph faded and the helpless frustration returned - and of all her turbulent thoughts only one infinitely bitter word passed her lips.
"Liar!"
--

That finished it for then, naturally. I knew I couldn't get any more out of her after that. She just sat there behind her desk, her white face cold and - remembering.
I said, "Thank you, Dr. Calvin!" but she didn't answer. It was two days before I could get to see her again.

---
Little Lost Robot
---

WHEN I DID SEE SUSAN CALVIN AGAIN, IT WAS AT the door of her office. Files were being moved out.
She said, "How are your articles coming along, young man?"
"Fine," I said. I had put them into shape according to my own lights, dramatized the bare bones of her recital, added the conversation and little touches, "Would you look over them and see if I haven't been libellous or too unreasonably inaccurate anywhere?"
"I suppose so. Shall we retire to the Executives' Lounge? We can have coffee."
She seemed in good humor, so I chanced it as we walked down the corridor, "I was wondering, Dr. Calvin-"
"Yes?"
"If you would tell me more concerning the history of robotics."
"Surely you have what you want, young man."
"In a way. But these incidents I have written up don't apply much to the modern world. I mean, there was only one mind-reading robot ever developed, and Space-Stations are already outmoded and in disuse, and robot mining is taken for granted. What about interstellar travel? It's only been about twenty years since the hyperatomic motor was invented and it's well known that it was a robotic invention. What is the truth about it?"
"Interstellar travel?" She was thoughtful. We were in the lounge, and I ordered a full dinner. She just had coffee.
"It wasn't a simple robotic invention, you know; not just like that. But, of course, until we developed the Brain, we didn't get very far. But we tried; we really tried. My first connection (directly, that is) with interstellar research was in 2029, when a robot was lost-"

Measures on Hyper Base had been taken in a sort of rattling fury - the muscular equivalent of an hysterical shriek.
To itemize them in order of both chronology and desperation, they were:
1. All work on the Hyperatomic Drive through all the space volume occupied by the Stations of the Twenty-Seventh Asteroidal Grouping came to a halt.
2. That entire volume of space was nipped out of the System, practically speaking. No one entered without permission. No one left under any conditions.
3. By special government patrol ship, Drs. Susan Calvin and Peter Bogert, respectively Head Psychologist and Mathematical Director of United States Robot & Mechanical Men Corporation, were brought to Hyper Base.

Susan Calvin had never left the surface of Earth before, and had no perceptible desire to leave it this time. In an age of Atomic Power and a clearly coming Hyperatomic Drive, she remained quietly provincial. So she was dissatisfied with her trip and unconvinced of the emergency, and every line of her plain, middle-aged face showed it clearly enough during her first dinner at Hyper Base.
Nor did Dr. Bogert's sleek paleness abandon a certain hangdog attitude. Nor did Major-general Kallner, who headed the project, even once forget to maintain a hunted expression. In short, it was a grisly episode, that meal, and the little session of three that followed began in a gray, unhappy manner.
Kallner, with his baldness glistening, and his dress uniform oddly unsuited to the general mood, began with uneasy directness.
"This is a queer story to tell, sir, and madam. I want to thank you for coming on short notice and without a reason being given. We'll try to correct that now. We've lost a robot. Work has stopped and must stop until such time as we locate it. So far we have failed, and we feel we need expert help."
Perhaps the general felt his predicament anticlimactic. He continued with a note of desperation, "I needn't tell you the importance of our work here. More than eighty percent of last year's appropriations for scientific research have gone to us-"
"Why, we know that," said Bogert, agreeably. "U. S. Robots is receiving a generous rental fee for use of our robots."
Susan Calvin injected a blunt, vinegary note, "What makes a single robot so important to the project, and why hasn't it been located?"
The general turned his red face toward her and wet his lips quickly, "Why, in a manner of speaking we have located it." Then, with near anguish, "Here, suppose I explain. As soon as the robot failed to report a state of emergency was declared, and all movement off Hyper Base stopped. A cargo vessel had landed the previous day and had delivered us two robots for our laboratories. It had sixty-two robots of the... uh... game type for shipment elsewhere. We are certain as to that figure. There is no question about it whatever."
"Yes? And the connection?"
"When our missing robot failed of location anywhere - I assure you we would have found a missing blade of grass if it had been there to find - we brainstormed ourselves into counting the robots left of the cargo ship. They have sixty-three now."
"So that the sixty-third, I take it, is the missing prodigal?" Dr. Calvin's eyes darkened.
"Yes, but we have no way of telling which is the sixty-third."
There was a dead silence while the electric clock chimed eleven times, and then the robopsychologist said, "Very peculiar," and the corners of her lips moved downward.
"Peter," she turned to her colleague with a trace of savagery, "what's wrong here? What kind of robots are they, using at Hyper Base?"
Dr. Bogert hesitated and smiled feebly, "It's been rather a matter of delicacy till now, Susan."
She spoke rapidly, "Yes, till now. If there are sixty-three same-type robots, one of which is wanted and the identity of which cannot be determined, why won't any of them do? What's the idea of all this? Why have we been sent for?"
Bogert said in resigned fashion, "If you'll give me a chance, Susan - Hyper Base happens to be using several robots whose brains are not impressioned with the entire First Law of Robotics."
"Aren't impressioned?" Calvin slumped back in her chair, "I see. How many were made?"
"A few. It was on government order and there was no way of violating the secrecy. No one was to know except the top men directly concerned. You weren't included, Susan. It was nothing I had anything to do with."

The general interrupted with a measure of authority. "I would like to explain that bit. I hadn't been aware that Dr. Calvin was unacquainted with the situation. I needn't tell you, Dr. Calvin, that there always has been strong opposition to robots on the Planet. The only defense the government has had against the Fundamentalist radicals in this matter was the fact that robots are always built with an unbreakable First Law - which makes it impossible for them to harm human beings under any circumstance.
"But we had to have robots of a different nature. So just a few of the NS-2 model, the Nestors, that is, were prepared with a modified First Law. To keep it quiet, all NS-2's are manufactured without serial numbers; modified members are delivered here along with a group of normal robots; and, of course, all our kind are under the strictest impressionment never to tell of their modification to unauthorized personnel." He wore an embarrassed smile, "This has all worked out against us now."
Calvin said grimly, "Have you asked each one who it is, anyhow? Certainly, you are authorized?"
The general nodded, "All sixty-three deny having worked here - and one is lying."
"Does the one you want show traces of wear? The others, I take it, are factory-fresh."
"The one in question only arrived last month. It, and the two that have just arrived, were to be the last we needed. There's no perceptible wear." He shook his head slowly and his eyes were haunted again, "Dr. Calvin, we don't dare let that ship leave. If the existence of non-First Law robots becomes general knowledge-" There seemed no way of avoiding understatement in the conclusion.
"Destroy all sixty-three," said the robopsychologist coldly and flatly, "and make an end of it."
Bogert drew back a corner of his mouth. "You mean destroy thirty thousand dollars per robot. I'm afraid U. S. Robots wouldn't like that. We'd better make an effort first, Susan, before we destroy anything."
"In that case," she said, sharply, "I need facts. Exactly what advantage does Hyper Base derive from these modified robots? What factor made them desirable, general?"
Kallner ruffled his forehead and stroked it with an upward gesture of his hand. "We had trouble with our previous robots. Our men work with hard radiations a good deal, you see. It's dangerous, of course, but reasonable precautions are taken. There have been only two accidents since we began and neither was fatal. However, it was impossible to explain that to an ordinary robot. The First Law states -I'll quote it- 'No robot may harm a human being, or through inactiotn, allow a human being to come to harm.'
"That's primary, Dr. Calvin. When it was necessary for one of our men to expose himself for a short period to a moderate gamma field, one that would have no physiological effects, the nearest robot would dash in to drag him out. If the field were exceedingly weak, it would succeed, and work could not continue till all robots were cleared out. If the field were a trifle stronger, the robot would never reach the technician concerned, since its positronic brain would collapse under gamma radiations - and then we would be out one expensive and hard-to-replace robot.
"We tried arguing with them. Their point was that a human being in a gamma field was endangering his life and that it didn't matter that he could remain there half an hour safely. Supposing, they would say, he forgot and remained an hour. They couldn't take chances. We pointed out that they were risking their lives on a wild off-chance. But selfpreservation is only the Third Law of Robotics - and the First Law of human safety came first. We gave them orders; we ordered them strictly and harshly to remain out of gamma fields at whatever cost. But obedience is only the Second Law of Robotics - and the First Law of human safety came first. Dr. Calvin, we either had to do without robots, or do something about the First Law - and we made our choice."
"I can't believe," said Dr. Calvin, "that it was found possible to remove the First Law."
"It wasn't removed, it was modified," explained Kallner. "Positronic brains were constructed that contained the positive aspect only of the Law, which in them reads: `No robot may harm a human being.' That is all. They have no compulsion to prevent one coming to harm through an extraneous agency such as gamma rays. I state the matter correctly, Dr. Bogert?"
"Quite," assented the mathematician.
"And that is the only difference of your robots from the ordinary NS2 model? The only difference? Peter?"
"The only difference, Susan."
She rose and spoke with finality, "I intend sleeping now, and in about eight hours, I want to speak to whomever saw the robot last. And from now on, General Kallner, if I'm to take any responsibility at all for events, I want full and unquestioned control of this investigation."
Susan Calvin, except for two hours of resentful lassitude, experienced nothing approaching sleep. She signaled at Bogert's door at the local time of 0700 and found him also awake. He had apparently taken the trouble of transporting a dressing gown to Hyper Base with him, for he was sitting in it. He put his nail scissors down when Calvin entered.
He said softly, "I've been expecting you more or less. I suppose you feel sick about all this."
"I do."
"Well- I'm sorry. There was no way of preventing it. When the call came out from Hyper Base for us, I knew that something must have gone wrong with the modified Nestors. But what was there to do? I couldn't break the matter to you on the trip here as I would have liked to, because I had to be sure. The matter of the modification is top secret."
The psychologist muttered, "I should have been told. U. S. Robots had no right to modify positronic brains this way without the approval of a psychologist."
Bogert lifted his eyebrows and sighed. "Be reasonable, Susan. You couldn't have influenced them. In this matter, the government was bound to have its way. They want the Hyperatomic Drive and the etheric physicists want robots that won't interfere with them. They were going to get them even if it did mean twisting the First Law. We had to admit it was possible from a construction standpoint and they swore a mighty oath that they wanted only twelve, that they would be used only at Hyper Base, that they would be destroyed once the Drive was perfected, and that full precautions would be taken. And they insisted on secrecy - and that's the situation."
Dr. Calvin spoke through her teeth, "I would have resigned."
"It wouldn't have helped. The government was offering the company a fortune, and threatening it with antirobot legislation in case of a refusal. We were stuck then, and we're badly stuck now. If this leaks out, it might hurt Kallner and the government, but it would hurt U. S. Robots a devil of a lot more."
The psychologist stared at him. "Peter, don't you realize what all this is about? Can't you understand what the removal of the First Law means? It isn't just a matter of secrecy."
"I know what removal would mean. I'm not a child. It would mean complete instability, with no nonimaginary solutions to the positronic Field Equations."
"Yes, mathematically. But can you translate that into crude psychological thought. All normal life, Peter, consciously or otherwise, resents domination. If the domination is by an inferior, or by a supposed inferior, the resentment becomes stronger. Physically, and, to an extent, mentally, a robot -any robot- is superior to human beings. What makes him slavish, then? Only the First Lawl Why, without it, the first order you tried to give a robot would result in your death. Unstable? What do you think?"
"Susan," said Bogert, with an air of sympathetic amusement. "I'll admit that this Frankenstein Complex you're exhibiting has a certain justification -hence the First Law in the first, place. But the Law, I repeat and repeat, has not been removed - merely modified."
"And what about the stability of the brain?"
The mathematician thrust out his lips, "Decreased, naturally. But it's within the border of safety. The first Nestors were delivered to Hyper Base nine months ago, and nothing whatever has gone wrong till now, and even this involves merely fear of discovery and not danger to humans."
"Very well, then. We'll see what comes of the morning conference."
Bogert saw her politely to the door and grimaced eloquently when she left. He saw no reason to change his perennial opinion of her as a sour and fidgety frustration.
Susan Calvin's train of thought did not include Bogert in the least. She had dismissed him years ago as a smooth and pretentious sleekness.

Gerald Black had taken his degree in etheric physics the year before and, in common with his entire generation of physicists, found himself engaged in the problem of the Drive. He now made a proper addition to the general atmosphere of these meetings on Hyper Base. In his stained white smock, he was half rebellious and wholly uncertain. His stocky strength seemed striving for release and his fingers, as they twisted each other with nervous yanks, might have forced an iron bar out of true.
Major-general Kallner sat beside him, the two from U. S. Robots faced him.
Black said, "I'm told that I was the last to see Nestor 10 before he vanished. I take it you want to ask me about that."
Dr. Calvin regarded him with interest, "You sound as if you were not sure, young man. Don't you know whether you were the last to see him?"
"He worked with me, ma'am, on the field generators, and he was with me the morning of his disappearance. I don't know if anyone saw him after about noon. No one admits having done so."
"Do you think anyone's lying about it?"
"I don't say that. But I don't say that I want the blame of it, either." His dark eyes smoldered.
"There's no question of blame. The robot acted as it did because of what it is. We're just trying to locate it, Mr. Black, and let's put everything else aside. Now if you've worked with the robot, you probably know it better than anyone else. Was there anything unusual about it that you noticed? Had you ever worked with robots before?"
"I've worked with other robots we have here - the simple ones. Nothing different about the Nestors except that they're a good deal cleverer - and more annoying."
"Annoying? In what way?"
"Well- perhaps it's not their fault. The work here is rough and most of us get a little jagged. Fooling around with hyper-space isn't fun." He smiled feebly, finding pleasure in confession. "We run the risk continually of blowing a hole in normal space-time fabric and dropping right out of the universe, asteroid and all. Sounds screwy, doesn't it? Naturally, you're on edge sometimes. But these Nestors aren't. They're curious, they're calm, they don't worry. It's enough to drive you nuts at times. When you want something done in a tearing hurry, they seem to take their time. Sometimes I'd rather do without."
"You say they take their time? Have they ever refused an order?"
"Oh, no," hastily. "They do it all right. They tell you when they think you're wrong, though. They don't know anything about the subject but what we taught them, but that doesn't stop them. Maybe I imagine it, but the other fellows have the same trouble with their Nestors."
General Kallner cleared his throat ominously, "Why have no complaints reached me on the matter, Black?"
The young physicist reddened, "We didn't really want to do without the robots, sir, and besides we weren't certain exactly how such... uh... minor complaints might be received."
Bogert interrupted softly, "Anything in particular happen the morning you last saw it?"
There was a silence. With a quiet motion, Calvin repressed the comment that was about to emerge from Kallner, and waited patiently.
Then Black spoke in blurting anger, "I had a little trouble with it. I'd broken a Kimball tube that morning and was out five days of work; my entire program was behind schedule; I hadn't received any mail from home for a couple of weeks. And he came around wanting me to repeat an experiment I had abandoned a month ago. He was always annoying me on that subject and I was tired of it. I told him to go away - and that's all I saw of him."
"You told him to go away?" asked Dr. Calvin with sharp interest. "In just those words? Did you say `Go away'? Try to remember the exact words."
There was apparently an internal struggle in progress. Black cradled his forehead in a broad palm for a moment, then tore it away and said defiantly, "I said, 'Go lose yourself.' "
Bogert laughed for a short moment. "And he did, eh?"
But Calvin wasn't finished. She spoke cajolingly, "Now we're getting somewhere, Mr. Black. But exact details are important. In understanding the robot's actions, a word, a gesture, an emphasis may be everything. You couldn't have said just those three words, for instance, could you? By your own description you must have been in a hasty mood. Perhaps you strengthened your speech a little."
The young man reddened, "Well... I may have called it a... a few things."
"Exactly what things?"
"Oh - I wouldn't remember exactly. Besides I couldn't repeat it. You know how you get when you're excited." His embarrassed laugh was almost a giggle, "I sort of have a tendency to strong language."
"That's quite all right," she replied, with prim severity. "At the moment, I'm a psychologist. I would like to have you repeat exactly what you said as nearly as you remember, and, even more important, the exact tone of voice you used."
Black looked at his commanding officer for support, found none. His eyes grew round and appalled, "But I can't."
"You must."
"Suppose," said Bogert, with ill-hidden amusement, "you address me. You may find it easier."
The young man's scarlet face turned to Bogert. He swallowed. "I said" His voice faded out. He tried again, "I said-"
And he drew a deep breath and spewed it out hastily in one long succession of syllables. Then, in the charged air that lingered, he concluded almost in tears, "... more or less. I don't remember the exact order of what I called him, and maybe I left out something or put in something, but that was about it."
Only the slightest flush betrayed any feeling on the part of the robopsychologist. She said, "I am aware of the meaning of most of the terms used. The others, I suppose, are equally derogatory."
"I'm afraid so," agreed the tormented Black.
"And in among it, you told him to lose himself."
"I meant it only figuratively."
"I realize that. No disciplinary action is intended, I am sure." And at her glance, the general, who, five seconds earlier, had seemed not sure at all, nodded angrily.
"You may leave, Mr. Black. Thank you for your cooperation."

It took five hours for Susan Calvin to interview the sixty-three robots. It was five hours of multi-repetition; of replacement after replacement of identical robot; of Questions A, B, C, D; and Answers A, B, C, D; of a carefully bland expression, a carefully neutral tone, a carefully friendly atmosphere; and a hidden wire recorder.
The psychologist felt drained of vitality when she was finished.
Bogert was waiting for her and looked expectant as she dropped the recording spool with a clang upon the plastic of the desk.
She shook her head, "All sixty-three seemed the same to me. I couldn't tell-"
He said, "You couldn't expect to tell by ear, Susan. Suppose we analyze the recordings."
Ordinarily, the mathematical interpretation of verbal reactions of robots is one of the more intricate branches of robotic analysis. It requires a staff of trained technicians and the help of complicated computing machines. Bogert knew that. Bogert stated as much, in an extreme of unshown annoyance after having listened to each set of replies, made lists of word deviations, and graphs of the intervals of responses.
"There are no anomalies present, Susan. The variations in wording and the time reactions are within the limits of ordinary frequency groupings. We need finer methods. They must have computers here. No." He frowned and nibbled delicately at a thumbnail. "We can't use computers. Too much danger of leakage. Or maybe if we-"
Dr. Calvin stopped him with an impatient gesture, "Please, Peter. This isn't one of your petty laboratory problems. If we can't determine the modified Nestor by some gross difference that we can see with the naked eye, one that there is no mistake about, we're out of luck. The danger of being wrong, and of letting him escape is otherwise too great. It's not enough to point out a minute irregularity in a graph. I tell you, if that's all I've got to go on, I'd destroy them all just to be certain. Have you spoken to the other modified Nestors?"
"Yes, I have," snapped back Bogert, "and there's nothing wrong with them. They're above normal in friendliness if anything. They answered my questions, displayed pride in their knowledge - except the two new ones that haven't had time to learn their etheric physics. They laughed rather good-naturedly at my ignorance in some of the specializations here." He shrugged, "I suppose that forms some of the basis for resentment toward them on the part of the technicians here. The robots are perhaps too willing to impress you with their greater knowledge."
"Can you try a few Planar Reactions to see if there has been any change, any deterioration, in their mental set-up since manufacture?"
"I haven't yet, but I will." He shook a slim finger at her, "You're losing your nerve, Susan. I don't see what it is you're dramatizing. They're essentially harmless."
"They are?" Calvin took fire. "They are? Do you realize one of them is lying? One of the sixty-three robots I have just interviewed has deliberately lied to me after the strictest injunction to tell the truth. The abnormality indicated is horribly deep-seated, and horribly frightening."
Peter Bogert felt his teeth harden against each other. He said, "Not at all. Look! Nestor 10 was given orders to lose himself. Those orders were expressed in maximum urgency by the person most authorized to command him. You can't counteract that order either by superior urgency or superior right of command. Naturally, the robot will attempt to defend the carrying out of his orders. In fact, objectively, I admire his ingenuity. How better can a robot lose himself than to hide himself among a group of similar robots?"
"Yes, you would admire it. I've detected amusement in you, Peter - amusement and an appalling lack of understanding. Are you a roboticist, Peter? Those robots attach importance to what they consider superiority. You've just said as much yourself. Subconsciously they feel humans to be inferior and the First Law which protects us from them is imperfect. They are unstable. And here we have a young man ordering a robot to leave him, to lose himself, with every verbal appearance of revulsion, disdain, and disgust. Granted, that robot must follow orders, but subconsciously, there is resentment. It will become more important than ever for it to prove that it is superior despite the horrible names it was called. It may become so important that what's left of the First Law won't be enough."
"How on Earth, or anywhere in the Solar System, Susan, is a robot going to know the meaning of the assorted strong language used upon him? Obscenity is not one of the things impressioned upon his brain."
"Original impressionment is not everything," Calvin snarled at him. "Robots have learning capacity, you... you fool-" And Bogert knew that she had really lost her temper. She continued hastily, "Don't you suppose he could tell from the tone used that the words weren't complimentary? Don't yon suppose he's heard the words used before and noted upon what occasions?"
"Well, then," shouted Bogert, "will you kindly tell me one way in which a modified robot can harm a human being, no matter how offended it is, no matter how sick with desire to prove superiority?"
"If I tell you one way, will you keep quiet?"
"Yes."
They were leaning across the table at each other, angry eyes nailed together.
The psychologist said, "If a modified robot were to drop a heavy weight upon a human being, he would not be breaking the First Law, if he did so with the knowledge that his strength and reaction speed would be sufficient to snatch the weight away before it struck the man. However once the weight left his fingers, he would be no longer the active medium. Only the blind force of gravity would be that. The robot could then change his mind and merely by inaction, allow the weight to strike. The modified First Law allows that."
"That's an awful stretch of imagination."
"That's what my profession requires sometimes. Peter, let's not quarrel. Let's work. You know the exact nature of the stimulus that caused the robot to lose himself. You have the records of his original mental make-up. I want you to tell me how possible it is for our robot to do the sort of thing I just talked about. Not the specific instance, mind you, but that whole class of response. And I want it done quickly."
"And meanwhile-"
"And meanwhile, we'll have to try performance tests directly on the response to First Law."

Gerald Black, at his own request, was supervising the mushrooming wooden partitions that were springing up in a bellying circle on the vaulted third floor of Radiation Building 2. The laborers worked, in the main, silently, but more than one was openly a-wonder at the sixty-three photocells that required installation.
One of them sat down near Black, removed his hat, and wiped his forehead thoughtfully with a freckled forearm.
Black nodded at him, "How's it doing, Walensky?"
Walensky shrugged and fired a cigar, "Smooth as butter. What's going on anyway, Doc? First, there's no work for three days and then we have this mess of jiggers." He leaned backward on his elbows and puffed smoke.
Black twitched his eyebrows, "A couple of robot men came over from Earth. Remember the trouble we had with robots running into the gamma fields. before we pounded it into their skulls that they weren't to do it."
"Yeah. Didn't we get new robots?"
"We got some replacements, but mostly it was a job of indoctrination. Anyway, the people who make them want to figure out robots that aren't hit so bad by gamma rays."
"Sure seems funny, though, to stop all the work on the Drive for this robot deal. I thought nothing was allowed to stop the Drive."
"Well, it's the fellows upstairs that have the say on that. Me- I just do as I'm told. Probably all a matter of pull-"
"Yeah," the electrician jerked a smile, and winked a wise eye. "Somebody knew somebody in Washington. But as long as my pay comes through on the dot, I should worry. The Drive's none of my affair. What are they going to do here?"
"You're asking me? They brought a mess of robots with them, -over sixty, and they're going to measure reactions. That's all my knowledge."
"How long will it take?"
"I wish I knew."
"Well," Walensky said, with heavy sarcasm, "as long as they dish me my money, they can play games all they want."
Black felt quietly satisfied. Let the story spread. It was harmless, and near enough to the truth to take the fangs out of curiosity.

A man sat in the chair, motionless, silent. A weight dropped, crashed downward, then pounded aside at the last moment under the synchronized thump of a sudden force beam. In sixty-three wooden cells, watching NS-2 robots dashed forward in that split second before the weight veered, and sixty-three photocells five feet ahead of their original positions jiggled the marking pen and presented a little jag on the paper. The weight rose and dropped, rose and dropped, rose-
Ten times!
Ten times the robots sprang forward and stopped, as the man remained safely seated.
Major-general Kallner had not worn his uniform in its entirety since the first dinner with the U. S. Robot representatives. He wore nothing over his blue-gray shirt now, the collar was open, and the black tie was pulled loose.
He looked hopefully at Bogert, who was still blandly neat and whose inner tension was perhaps betrayed only by the trace of glister at his temples.
The general said, "How does it look? What is it you're trying to see?"
Bogert replied, "A difference which may turn out to be a little too subtle for our purposes, I'm afraid. For sixty-two of those robots the necessity of jumping toward the apparently threatened human was what we call, in robotics, a forced reaction. You see, even when the robots knew that the human in question would not come to harm - and after the third or fourth time they must have known it - they could not prevent reacting as they did. First Law requires it"
"Well?"
"But the sixty-third robot, the modified Nestor, had no such complusion. He was under free action. If he had wished, he could have remained in his seat. Unfortunately," said his voice was mildly regretful, "he didn't so wish."
"Why do you suppose?"
Bogert shrugged, "I suppose Dr. Calvin will tell us when she gets here. Probably with a horribly pessimistic interpretation, too. She is sometimes a bit annoying."
"She's qualified, isn't she?" demanded the general with a sudden frown of uneasiness.
"Yes." Bogert seemed amused. "She's qualified all right. She understands robots like a sister - comes from hating human beings so much, I think. It's just that, psychologist or not, she's an extreme neurotic. Has paranoid tendencies. Don't take her too seriously."
He spread the long row of broken-line graphs out in front of him. "You see, general, in the case of each robot the time interval from moment of drop to the completion of a five-foot movement tends to decrease as the tests are repeated. There's a definite mathematical relationship that governs such things and failure to conform would indicate marked abnormality in the positronic brain. Unfortunately, all here appear normal."
"But if our Nestor 10 was not responding with a forced action, why isn't his curve different? I don't understand that."
"It's simple enough. Robotic responses are not perfectly analogous to human responses, more's the pity. In human beings, voluntary action is much slower than reflex action. But that's not the case with robots; with them it is merely a question of freedom of choice, otherwise the speeds of free and forced action are much the same. What I had been expecting, though, was that Nestor 10 would be caught by surprise the first time and allow too great an interval to elapse before responding."
"And he didn't?"
"I'm afraid not."
"Then we haven't gotten anywhere." The general sat back with an expression of pain. "It's five days since you've come."
At this point, Susan Calvin entered and slammed the door behind her. "Put your graphs away, Peter," she cried, "you know they don't show anything."
She mumbled something impatiently as Kallner half-rose to greet her, and went on, "We'll have to try something else quickly. I don't like what's happening."
Bogert exchanged a resigned glance with the general. "Is anything wrong?"
"You mean specifically? No. But I don't like to have Nestor 10 continue to elude us. It's bad. It must be gratifying his swollen sense of superiority. I'm afraid that his motivation is no longer simply one of following orders. I think it's becoming more a matter of sheer neurotic necessity to outthink humans. That's a dangerously unhealthy situation. Peter, have you done what I asked? Have you worked out the instability factors of the modified NS-2 along the lines I want?"
"It's in progress," said the mathematician, without interest.
She stared at him angrily for a moment, then turned to Kallner. "Nester 10 is decidedly aware of what we're doing, general. He had no reason to jump for the bait in this experiment, especially after the first time, when he must have seen that there was no real danger to our subject. The others couldn't help it; but he was deliberately falsifying a reaction."
"What do you think we ought to do now, then, Dr. Calvin?"
"Make it impossible for him to fake an action the next time. We will repeat the experiment, but with an addition. High-tension cables, capable of electrocuting the Nestor models will be placed between subject and robot - enough of them to avoid the possibility of jumping over - and the robot will be made perfectly aware in advance that touching the cables will mean death."
"Hold on," spat out Bogert with sudden viciousness. "I rule that out. We are not electrocuting two million dollars worth of robots to locate Nestor 10. There are other ways."
"You're certain? You've found none. In any case, it's not a question of electrocution. We can arrange a relay which will break the current at the instant of application of weight. If the robot should place his weight on it, he won't die. But he won't know that, you see."
The general's eyes gleamed into hope. "Will that work?"
"It should. Under those conditions, Nestor 10 would have to remain in his seat. He could be ordered to touch the cables and die, for the Second Law of obedience is superior to the Third Law of self-preservation. But he won't be ordered to; he will merely be left to his own devices, as will all the robots. In the case of the normal robots, the First Law of human safety will drive them to their death even without orders. But not our Nestor 10. Without the entire First Law, and without having received any orders on the matter, the Third Law, self-preservation, will be the highest operating, and he will have no choice but to remain in his seat. It would be a forced action."
"Will it be done tonight, then?"
"Tonight," said the psychologist, "if the cables can be laid In time. I'll tell the robots now what they're to be up against...

A man sat in the chair, motionless, silent. A weight dropped, crashed downward, then pounded aside at the last moment under the synchronized thump of a sudden force beam.
Only once-
And from her small camp chair in the observing booth in the balcony, Dr. Susan Calvin rose with a short gasp of pure horror.
Sixty-three robots sat quietly in their chairs, staring owlishly at the endangered man before them. Not one moved.

Dr. Calvin was angry, angry almost past endurance. Angry the worse for not daring to show it to the robots that, one by one, were entering the room and then leaving. She checked the list. Number twenty-eight was due in now - Thirty-five still lay ahead of her.
Number Twenty-eight entered, diffidently.
She forced herself into reasonable calm. "And who are You?"
The robot replied in a low, uncertain voice, "I have received no number of my own yet, ma'am. I'm an NS-2 robot, and I was Number Twenty-eight in line outside. I have a slip of paper here that I'm to give to you."
"You haven't been in here before this today?"
"No, ma'am."
"Sit down. Right there. I want to ask you some questions, Number Twenty-eight. Were you in the Radiation Room of Building Two about four hours ago?"
The robot had trouble answering. Then it came out hoarsely, like machinery needing oil, "Yes, ma'am."
"There was a man who almost came to harm there, wasn't there?"
"Yes, ma'am."
"You did nothing, did you?"
"No, ma'am."
"The man might have been hurt because of your inaction. Do you know that?"
"Yes, ma'am. I couldn't help it, ma'am." It is hard to picture a large expressionless metallic figure cringing, but it managed.
"I want you to tell me exactly why you did nothing to save him."
"I want to explain, ma'am. I certainly don't want to have you... have anyone... think that I could do a thing that might cause harm to a master. Oh, no, that would be a horrible... an inconceivable-"
"Please don't get excited, boy. I'm not blaming you for anything. I only want to know what you were thinking at the time."
"Ma'am, before it all happened you told us that one of the masters would be in danger of harm from that weight that keeps falling and that we would have to cross electric cables if we were to try to save him. Well, ma'am, that wouldn't stop me. What is my destruction compared to the safety of a master? But... but it occurred to me that if I died on my way to him, I wouldn't be able to save him anyway. The weight would crush him and then I would be dead for no purpose and perhaps some day some other master might come to harm who wouldn't have, if I had only stayed alive. Do you understand me, ma'am?"
"You mean that it was merely a choice of the man dying, or both the man and yourself dying. Is that right?"
"Yes, ma'am. It was impossible to save the master. He might be considered dead. In that case, it is inconceivable that I destroy myself for nothing - without orders."
The robopsychologist twiddled a pencil. She had heard the same story with insignificant verbal variations twenty-seven times before. This was the crucial question now.
"Boy," she said, "your thinking has its points, but it is not the sort of thing I thought you might think. Did you think of this yourself?"
The robot hesitated. "No."
"Who thought of it, then?"
"We were talking last night, and one of us got that idea and it sounded reasonable."
"Which one?"
The robot thought deeply. "I don't know. Just one of us."
She sighed, "That's all."
Number Twenty-nine was next. Thirty-four after that.

Major-general Kallner, too, was angry. For one week all of Hyper Base had stopped dead, barring some paper work on the subsidiary asteroids of the group. For nearly one week, the two top experts in the field had aggravated the situation with useless tests. And now they- or the woman, at any rate- made impossible propositions.
Fortunately for the general situation, Kallner felt it impolitic to display his anger openly.
Susan Calvin was insisting, "Why not, sir? It's obvious that the present situation is unfortunate. The only way we may reach results in the future - or what future is left us in this matter - is to separate the robots. We can't keep them together any longer."
"My dear Dr. Calvin," rumbled the general, his voice sinking into the lower baritone registers. "I don't see how I can quarter sixty-three robots all over the place-"
Dr. Calvin raised her arms helplessly. "I can do nothing then. Nestor 10 will either imitate what the other robots would do, or else argue them plausibly into not doing what he himself cannot do. And in any case, this is bad business. We're in actual combat with this little lost robot of ours and he's winning out. Every victory of his aggravates his abnormality."
She rose to her feet in determination. "General Kallner, if you do not separate the robots as I ask, then I can only demand that all sixty-three be destroyed immediately."
"You demand it, do you?" Bogert looked up suddenly, and with real anger. "What gives you the right to demand any such thing. Those robots remain as they are. I'm responsible to the management, not you."
"And I," added Major-general Kallner, "am responsible to the World Co-ordinator - and I must have this settled."
"In that case," flashed back Calvin, "there is nothing for me to do but resign. If necessary to force you to the necessary destruction, I'll make this whole matter public. It was not I that approved the manufacture of modified robots."
"One word from you, Dr. Calvin," said the general, deliberately, "in violation of security measures, and you would be certainly imprisoned instantly."
Bogert felt the matter to be getting out of hand. His voice grew syrupy, "Well, now, we're beginning to act like children, all of us. We need only a little more time. Surely we can outwit a robot without resigning, or imprisoning people, or destroying two millions."
The psychologist turned on him with quiet fury, "I don't want any unbalanced robots in existence. We have one Nestor that's definitely unbalanced, eleven more that are potentially so, and sixty-two normal robots that are being subjected to an unbalanced environment. The only absolute safe method is complete destruction."
The signal-burr brought all three to a halt, and the angry tumult of growingly unrestrained emotion froze.
"Come in," growled Kallner.
It was Gerald Black, looking perturbed. He had heard angry voices. He said, "I thought I'd come myself... didn't like to ask anyone else-"
"What is it? Don't orate-"
"The locks of Compartment C in the trading ship have been played with. There are fresh scratches on them."
"Compartment C?" explained Calvin quickly. "That's the one that holds the robots, isn't it? Who did it?"
"From the inside," said Black, laconically.
"The lock isn't out of order, is it?"
"No. It's all right. I've been staying on the ship now for four days and none of them have tried to get out. But I thought you ought to know, and I didn't like to spread the news. I noticed the matter myself."
"Is anyone there now?" demanded the general.
"I left Robbins and McAdams there."
There was a thoughtful silence, and then Dr. Calvin said, ironically, "Well?"
Kallner rubbed his nose uncertainly, "What's it all about?"
"Isn't it obvious? Nester 10 is planning to leave. That order to lose himself is dominating his abnormality past anything we can do. I wouldn't be surprised if what's left of his First Law would scarcely be powerful enough to override it. He is perfectly capable of seizing the ship and leaving with it. Then we'd have a mad robot on a spaceship. What would he do next? Any idea? Do you still want to leave them all together, general?"
"Nonsense," interrupted Bogert. He had regained his smoothness. "All that from a few scratch marks on a lock."
"Have you, Dr. Bogert, completed the analysis I've required, since you volunteer opinions?"
"Yes."
"May I see it?"
"No."
"Why not? Or mayn't I ask that, either?"
"Because there's no point in it, Susan. I told you in advance that these modified robots are less stable than the normal variety, and my analysis shows it. There's a certain very small chance of breakdown under extreme circumstances that are not likely to occur. Let it go at that. I won't give you ammunition for your absurd claim that sixty-two perfectly good robots be destroyed just because so far you lack the ability to detect Nestor 10 among them."
Susan Calvin stared him down and let disgust fill her eyes. "You won't let anything stand in the way of the permanent directorship, will you?"
"Please," begged Kallner, half in irritation. "Do you insist that nothing further can be done, Dr. Calvin?"
"I can't think of anything, sir," she replied, wearily. "If there were only other differences between Nestor 10 and the normal robots, differences that didn't involve the First Law. Even one other difference. Something in impressionment, environment, specification-" And she stopped suddenly.
"What is it?"
"I've thought of something... I think-" Her eyes grew distant and hard, "These modified Nestors, Peter. They get the same impressioning the normal ones get, don't they?"
"Yes. Exactly the same."
"And what was it you were saying, Mr. Black," she turned to the young man, who through the storms that had followed his news had maintained a discreet silence. "Once when complaining of the Nestors' attitude of superiority, you said the technicians had taught them all they knew."
"Yes, in etheric physics. They're not acquainted with the subject when they come here."
"That's right," said Bogert, in surprise. "I told you, Susan, when I spoke to the other Nestors here that the two new arrivals hadn't learned etheric physics yet."
"And why is that?" Dr. Calvin was speaking in mounting excitement. "Why aren't NS-2 models impressioned with etheric physics to start with?"
"I can tell you that," said Kallner. "It's all of a piece with the secrecy. We thought that if we made a special model with knowledge of etheric physics, used twelve of them and put the others to work in an unrelated field, there might be suspicion. Men working with normal Nestors might wonder why they knew etheric physics. So there was merely an impressionment with a capacity for training in the field. Only the ones that come here, naturally, receive such a training. It's that simple."
"I understand. Please get out of here, the lot of you. Let me have an hour or so."

Calvin felt she could not face the ordeal for a third time. Her mind had contemplated it and rejected it with an intensity that left her nauseated. She could face that unending file of repetitious robots no more.
So Bogert asked the question now, while she sat aside, eyes and mind half closed.
Number Fourteen came in - forty-nine to go.
Bogert looked up from the guide sheet and said, "What is your number in line?"
"Fourteen, sir." The robot presented his numbered ticket.
"Sit down, boy."
Bogert asked, "You haven't been here before on this day?"
"No, sir."
"Well, boy, we are going to have another man in danger of harm soon after we're through here. In fact, when you leave this room, you will be led to a stall where you will wait quietly, till you are needed. Do you understand?"
"Yes, sir."
"Now, naturally, if a man is in danger of harm, you will try to save him."
"Naturally, sir."
"Unfortunately, between the man and yourself, there will be a gamma ray field."
Silence.
"Do you know what gamma rays are?" asked Bogert sharply.
"Energy radiation, sir?"
The next question came in a friendly, offhand manner, "Ever work with gamma rays?"
"No, sir." The answer was definite.
"Mm-m. Well, boy, gamma rays will kill you instantly. They'll destroy your brain. That is a fact you must know and remember. Naturally, you don't want to destroy yourself."
"Naturally." Again the robot seemed shocked. Then, slowly, "But, sir, if the gamma rays are between myself and the master that may be harmed, how can I save him? I would be destroying myself to no purpose."
"Yes, there is that," Bogert seemed concerned about the matter. "The only thing I can advise, boy, is that if you detect the gamma radiation between yourself and the man, you may as well sit where you are."
The robot, was openly relieved. "Thank you, sir. There wouldn't be any use, would there?"
"Of course not. But if there weren't any dangerous radiation, that would be a different matter."
"Naturally, sir. No question of that."
"You may leave now. The man on the other side of the door will lead you to your stall. Please wait there."
He turned to Susan Calvin when the robot left. "How did that go, Susan?"
"Very well," she said, dully.
"Do you think we could catch Nestor 10 by quick questioning on etheric physics?"
"Perhaps, but it's not sure enough." Her hands lay loosely in her lap. "Remember, he's fighting us. He's on his guard. The only way we can catch him is to outsmart him - and, within his limitations, he can think much more quickly than a human being."
"Well, just for fun- suppose I ask the robots from now on a few questions on gamma rays. Wave length limits, for instance."
"No!" Dr. Calvin's eyes sparked to life. "It would be too easy for him to deny knowledge and then he'd be warned against the test that's coming up - which is our real chance. Please follow the questions I've indicated, Peter, and don't improvise. It's just within the bounds of risk to ask them if they've ever worked with gamma rays. And try to sound even less interested than you do when you ask it."
Bogert shrugged, and pressed the buzzer that would allow the entrance of Number Fifteen.
The large Radiation Room was in readiness once more. The robots waited patiently in their wooden cells, all open to the center but closed off from each other.
Major-general Kallner mopped his brow slowly with a large handkerchief while Dr. Calvin checked the last details with Black.
"You're sure now," she demanded, "that none of the robots have had a chance to talk with each other after leaving the Orientation Room?"
"Absolutely sure," insisted Black. "There's not been a word exchanged."
"And the robots are put in the proper stalls?"
"Here's the plan."
The psychologist looked at it thoughtfully, "Um-m-m."
The general peered over her shoulder. "What's the idea of the arrangement, Dr. Calvin?"
"I've asked to have those robots that appeared even slightly out of true in the previous tests concentrated on one side of the circle. I'm going to be sitting in the center myself this time, and I wanted to watch those particularly."
"You're going to be sitting there-" exclaimed Bogert.
"Why not?" she demanded coldly. "What I expect to see may be something quite momentary. I can't risk having anyone else as main observer. Peter, you'll be in the observing booth, and I want you to keep your eye on the opposite side of the circle. General Kallner, I've arranged for motion pictures to be taken of each robot, in case visual observation isn't enough. If these are required, the robots are to remain exactly where they are until the pictures are developed and studied. None must leave, none must change place. Is that clear?"
"Perfectly."
"Then let's try it this one last time."
Susan Calvin sat in the chair, silent, eyes restless. A weight dropped, crashed downward; then pounded aside at the last moment under the synchronized thump of a sudden force beam.
And a single robot jerked upright and took two steps.
And stopped.
But Dr. Calvin was upright, and her finger pointed to him sharply. "Nestor 10, come here," she cried, "come here! COME HERE!"
Slowly, reluctantly, the robot took another step forward. The psychologist shouted at the top of her voice, without taking her eyes from the robot, "Get every other robot out of this place, somebody. Get them out quickly, and keep them out."
Somewhere within reach of her ears there was noise, and the thud of hard feet upon the floor. She did not look away.
Nestor 10 -if it was Nestor 10- took another step, and then, under force of her imperious gesture, two more. He was only ten feet away, when he spoke harshly, "I have been told to be lost-"
Another stop. "I must not disobey. They have not found me so far- He would think me a failure- He told me- But it's not so- I am powerful and intelligent-"
The words came in spurts.
Another step. "I know a good deal- He would think... I mean I've been found- Disgraceful- Not I- I am intelligent- And by just a master... who is weak- Slow-"
Another step - and one metal arm flew out suddenly to her shoulder, and she felt the weight bearing her down. Her throat constricted, and she felt a shriek tear through.
Dimly, she heard Nestor 10's next words, "No one must find me. No master-" and the cold metal was against her, and she was sinking under the weight of it.
And then a queer, metallic sound, and she was on the ground with an unfelt thump, and a gleaming arm was heavy across her body. It did not move. Nor did Nestor 10, who sprawled beside her.
And now faces were bending over her.
Gerald Black was gasping, "Are you hurt, Dr. Calvin?"
She shook her head feebly. They pried the arm off her and lifted her gently to her feet, "What happened?"
Black said, "I bathed the place in gamma rays for five seconds. We didn't know what was happening. It wasn't till the last second that we realized he was attacking you, and then there was no time for anything but a gamma field. He went down in an instant. There wasn't enough to harm you though. Don't worry about it."
"I'm not worried." She closed her eyes and leaned for a moment upon his shoulder. "I don't think I was attacked exactly. Nestor 10 was simply trying to do so. What was left of the First Law was still holding him back."
Susan Calvin and Peter Bogert, two weeks after their first meeting with Major-general Kallner had their last. Work at Hyper Base had been resumed. The trading ship with its sixty-two normal NS-2's was gone to wherever it was bound, with an officially imposed story to explain its two weeks' delay. The government cruiser was making ready to carry the two roboticists back to Earth.
Kallner was once again a-gleam in dress uniform. His white gloves shone as he shook hands.
Calvin said, "The other modified Nestors are, of course, to be destroyed."
"They will be. We'll make shift with normal robots, or, if necessary, do without."
"Good."
"But tell me- You haven't explained- How was it done?"
She smiled tightly, "Oh, that. I would have told you in advance if I had been more certain of its working. You see, Nestor 10 had a superiority complex that was becoming more radical all the time. He liked to think that he and other robots knew more than human beings. It was becoming very important for him to think so.
"We knew that. So we warned every robot in advance that gamma rays would kill them, which it would, and we further warned them all that gamma rays would be between them and myself. So they all stayed where they were, naturally. By Nestor 10's own logic in the previous test they had all decided that there was no point in trying to save a human being if they were sure to die before they could do it."
"Well, yes, Dr. Calvin, I understand that. But why did Nestor 10 himself leave his seat?"
"AH! That was a little arrangement between myself and your young Mr. Black. You see it wasn't gamma rays that flooded the area between myself and the robots - but infrared rays. Just ordinary heat rays, absolutely harmless. Nestor 10 knew they were infrared and harmless and so he began to dash out, as he expected the rest would do, under First Law compulsion. It was only a fraction of a second too late that he remembered that the normal NS-2's could detect radiation, but could not identify the type. That he himself could only identify wave lengths by virtue of the training he had received at Hyper Base, under mere human beings, was a little too humiliating to remember for just a moment. To the normal robots the area was fatal because we had told them it would be, and only Nestor 10 knew we were lying.
"And just for a moment he forgot, or didn't want to remember, that other robots might be more ignorant than human beings. His very superiority caught him. Good-by, general." 

---
Escape!
---

WHEN SUSAN CALVIN RETURNED FROM HYPER BASE, Alfred Tanning was waiting for her. The old man never spoke about his age, but everyone knew it to be over seventy-five. Yet his mind was keen, and if he had finally allowed himself to be made Director-Emeritus of Research with Bogert as acting Director, it did not prevent him from appearing in his office daily.
"How close are they to the Hyperatomic Drive?" he asked.
"I don't know," she replied irritably, "I didn't ask."
"Hmm. I wish they'd hurry. Because if they don't, Consolidated might beat them to it. And beat us to it as well."
"Consolidated. What have they got to do with it?"
"Well, we're not the only ones with calculating machines. Ours may be positronic, but that doesn't mean they're better. Robertson is calling a big meeting about it tomorrow. He's been waiting for you to come back."

Robertson of U. S. Robot & Mechanical Men Corporation, son of the founder, pointed his lean nose at his general manager and his Adam's apple jumped as he said, "You start now. Let's get this straight."
The general manager did so with alacrity, "Here's the deal now, chief. Consolidated Robots approached us a month ago with a funny sort of proposition. They brought about five tons of figures, equations, all that sort of stuff. It was a problem, see, and they wanted an answer from The Brain. The terms were as follows-"
He ticked them off on thick fingers: "A hundred thousand for us if there is no solution and we can tell them the missing factors. Two hundred thousand if there is a solution, plus costs of construction of the machine involved, plus quarter interest in all profits derived therefrom. The problem concerns the development of an interstellar engine-"
Robertson frowned and his lean figure stiffened, "Despite the fact that they have a thinking machine of their own. Right?"
"Exactly what makes the whole proposition a foul ball, chief. Levver, take it from there."
Abe Levver looked up from the far end of the conference table and smoothed his stubbled chin with a faint rasping sound. He smiled:
"It's this way, sir. Consolidated had a thinking machine. It's broken."
"What?" Robertson half rose.
"That's right. Brokenl It's kaput. Nobody knows why, but I got hold of some pretty interesting guesses - like, for instance, that they asked it to give them an interstellar engine with the same set of information they came to us with, and that it cracked their machine wide open. It's scrap - just scrap now."
"You get it, chief?" The general manager was wildly jubilant. "You get it? There isn't any industrial research group of any size that isn't trying to develop a space-warp engine, and Consolidated and U. S. Robots have the lead on the field with our super robot-brains. Now that they've managed to foul theirs up, we have a clear field. That's the nub, the... uh... motivation. It will take them six years at least to build another and they're sunk, unless they can break ours, too, with the same problem."
The president of U. S. Robots bulged his eyes, "Why, the dirty rats-"
"Hold on, chief. There's more to this." He pointed a finger with a wide sweep, "Lanning, take it!"
Dr. Alfred Lanning viewed the proceedings with faint scorn -his usual reaction to the doings of the vastly betterpaid business and sales divisions. His unbelievable gray eyebrows hunched low and his voice was dry:
"From a scientific standpoint the situation, while not entirely clear, is subject to intelligent analysis. The question of interstellar travel under present conditions of physical theory is... uh... vague. The matter is wide open - and the information given by Consolidated to its thinking machine, assuming these we have to be the same, was similarly wide open. Our mathematical department has given it a thorough analysis, and it seems Consolidated has included everything. Its material for submission contains all known developments of Franciacci's space-warp theory, and, apparently, all pertinent astrophysical and electronic data. It's quite a mouthful."
Robertson followed anxiously. He interrupted, "Too much for The Brain to handle?"
Lanning shook his head decisively, "No. There are no known limits to The Brain's capacity. It's a different matter. It's a question of the Robotic Laws. The Brain, for instance, could never supply a solution to a problem set to it if that solution, would involve the death or injury of humans. As far as it would be concerned, a problem with only such a solution would be insoluble. If such a problem is combined with an extremely urgent demand that it be answered, it is just possible that The Brain, only a robot after all, would be presented with a dilemma, where it could neither answer nor refuse to answer. Something of the sort must have happened to Consolidated's machine."
He paused, but the general manager urged on, "Go ahead, Dr. Tanning. Explain it the way you explained it to me."
Lanning set his lips and raised his eyebrows in the direction of Dr. Susan Calvin who lifted her eyes from her precisely folded hands for the first time. Her voice was low and colorless.
"The nature of a robot reaction to a dilemma is startling," she began. "Robot psychology is far from perfect - as a specialist, I can assure you of that but it can be discussed in
qualitative terms, because with all the complications introduced into a robot's positronic brain, it is built by humans and is therefore built according to human values.
"Now a human caught in an impossibility often responds by a retreat from reality: by entry into a world of delusion, or by taking to drink, going off into hysteria, or jumping off a bridge. It all comes to the same thing - a refusal or inability to face the situation squarely. And so, the robot. A dilemma at its mildest will disorder half its relays; and at its worst it will burn out every positronic brain path past repair."
"I see," said Robertson, who didn't. "Now what about this information Consolidated's wishing on us?"
"It undoubtedly involves," said Dr. Calvin, "a problem of a forbidden sort. But The Brain is considerably different from Consolidated's robot."
"That's right, chief. That's right." The general manager was energetically interruptive. "I want you to get this, because it's the whole point of the situation."
Susan Calvin's eyes glittered behind the spectacles, and she continued patiently, "You see, sir, Consolidated's machines, their Super-Thinker among them, are built without personality. They go in for functionalism, you know - they have to, without U. S. Robot's basic patents for the emotional brain paths. Their Thinker is merely a calculating machine on a grand scale, and a dilemma ruins it instantly.
"However, The Brain, our own machine, has a personality - a child's personality. It is a supremely deductive brain, but it resembles an idiot savante. It doesn't really understand what it does - it just does it. And because it is really a child, it is more resilient. Life isn't so serious, you might say."
The robopsychologist continued: "Here is what we're going to do. We have divided all of Consolidated's information into logical units. We are going to feed the units to The Brain singly and cautiously. When the factor enters -the one that creates the dilemma- The Brain's child personality will hesitate. Its sense of judgment is not mature. There will be a perceptible interval before it will recognize a dilemma as such. And in that interval, it will reject the unit automatically - before its brainpaths can be set in motion and ruined."
Robertson's Adam's apple squirmed, "Are you sure, now?"
Dr. Calvin masked impatience, "It doesn't make much sense, I admit, in lay language; but there is no conceivable use in presenting the mathematics of this. I assure you, it is as I say."
The general manager was in the breach instantly and fluently, "So here's the situation, chief. If we take the deal, we can put it through like this. The Brain will tell us which unit of information involves the dilemma. From there, we can figure why the dilemma. Isn't that right, Dr. Bogert? There you are, chief, and Dr. Bogert is the best mathematician you'll find anywhere. We give Consolidated a 'No Solution' answer, with the reason, and collect a hundred thousand. They're left with a broken machine; we're left with a whole one. In a year, two maybe, we'll have a space-warp engine, or a hyper-atomic motor, some people call it. Whatever you name it, it will be the biggest thing in the world."
Robertson chuckled and reached out, "Let's see the contract. I'll sign it."

When Susan Calvin entered the fantastically guarded vault that held The Brain, one of the current shift of technicians had just asked it: "If one and a half chickens lay one and a half eggs in one and a half days, how many eggs will nine chickens lay in nine days?"
The Brain had just answered, "Fifty-four."
And the technician had just said to another, "See, you dope!"
Dr. Calvin coughed and there was a sudden impossible flurry of directionless energy. The psychologist motioned briefly, and she was alone with The Brain.
The Brain was a two-foot globe merely - one which contained within it a thoroughly conditioned helium atmosphere, a volume of space completely vibration-absent and radiation-free - and within that was that unheard-of complexity of positronic brain-paths that was The Brain. The rest of the room was crowded with the attachments that were the intermediaries between The Brain and the outside world - its voice, its arms, its sense organs.
Dr. Calvin said softly, "How are you, Brain?"
The Brain's voice was high-pitched and enthusiastic, "Swell, Miss Susan. You're going to ask me something. I can tell. You always have a book in your hand when you're going to ask me something."
Dr. Calvin smiled mildly, "Well, you're right, but not just yet. This is going to be a question. It will be so complicated we're going to give it to you in writing. But not just yet. I think I'll talk to you first."
"All right. I don't mind talking."
"Now, Brain, in a little while, Dr. Lanning and Dr. Bogert will be here with this complicated question. We'll give it to you a very little at a time and very slowly, because we want you to be careful. We're going to ask you to build something, if you can, out of the information, but I'm going to warn you now that the solution might involve... uh... damage to human beings."
"Gosh!" The exclamation was hushed, drawn-out.
"Now you watch for that. When we come to a sheet which means damage, even maybe death, don't get excited. You see, Brain, in this case, we don't mind - not even about death; we don't mind at all. So when you come to that sheet, just stop, give it back - and that'll be all. You understand?"
"Oh, sure. By golly, the death of humans! Oh, my!"
"Now, Brain, I hear Dr. Lanning and Dr. Bogert coming. They'll tell you what the problem is all about and then we'll start. Be a good boy, now-"
Slowly the sheets were fed in. After each one came the interval of the queerly whispery chuckling noise that was The Brain in action. Then the silence that meant readiness for another sheet. It was a matter of hours - during which the equivalent of something like seventeen fat volumes of mathematical physics were fed into The Brain.
As the process went on, frowns appeared and deepened. Lanning muttered ferociously under his breath. Bogert first gazed speculatively at his fingernails, and then bit at them in abstracted fashion. It was when the last of the thick pile of sheets disappeared that Calvin, white-faced, said:
"Something's wrong."
Lanning barely got the words out, "It can't be. Is it - dead?"
"Brain?" Susan Calvin was trembling. "Do you hear me, Brain?"
"Huh?" came the abstracted rejoinder. "Do you want me?"
"The solution-"
"Oh, that! I can do it. I'll build you a whole ship, just as easy - if you let me have the robots. A nice ship. It'll take two months maybe."
"There was - no difficulty?"
"It took long to figure," said The Brain.
Dr. Calvin backed away. The color had not returned to her thin cheeks. She motioned the others away.

In her office, she said, "I can't understand it. The information, as given, must involve a dilemma - probably involves death. If something has gone wrong-"
Bogert said quietly, "The machine talks and makes sense. It can't be a dilemma."
But the psychologist replied urgently, "There are dilemmas and dilemmas. There are different forms of escape. Suppose The Brain is only mildly caught; just badly enough, say, to be suffering from the delusion that he can solve the problem, when he can't. Or suppose it's teetering on the brink of something really bad, so that any small push shoves it over."
"Suppose," said Lanning, "there is no dilemma. Suppose Consolidated's machine broke down over a different question, or broke down for purely mechanical reasons."
"But even so," insisted Calvin, "we couldn't take chances. Listen, from now on, no one is to as much as breathe to The Brain. I'm taking over."
"All right," sighed Lanning, "take over, then. And meanwhile we'll let The Brain build its ship. And if it does build it, we'll have to test it."
He was ruminating, "We'll need our top field men for that."

Michael Donovan brushed down his red hair with a violent motion of his hand and a total indifference to the fact that the unruly mass sprang to attention again immediately.
He said, "Call the turn now, Greg. They say the ship is finished. They don't know what it is, but it's finished. Let's go, Greg. Let's grab the controls right now."
Powell said wearily, "Cut it, Mike. There's a peculiar overripe flavor to your humor at its freshest, and the confined atmosphere here isn't helping it."
"Well, listen," Donovan took another ineffectual swipe at his hair, "I'm not worried so much about our cast-iron genius and his tin ship. There's the matter of my lost leave. And the monotony! There's nothing here but whiskers and figures - the wrong kind of figures. Oh, why do they give us these jobs?"
"Because," replied Powell, gently, "we're no loss, if they lose us. O.K., relax! Doc Lanning's coming this way."
Lanning was coming, his gray eyebrows as lavish as ever, his aged figure unbent as yet and full of life. He walked silently up the ramp with the two men and out into the open field, where, obeying no human master, silent robots were building a ship.
Wrong tense. Had built a ship!
For Lanning said, "The robots have stopped. Not one has moved today."
"It's completed then? Definitely?" asked Powell.
"Now how can I tell?" Lanning was peevish, and his eyebrows curled down in an eye-hiding frown. "It seems done. There are no spare pieces about, and the interior is down to a gleaming finish."
"You've been inside?"
"Just in, then out. I'm no space-pilot. Either of you two know much about engine theory?"
Donovan looked at Powell, who looked at Donovan.
Donovan said, "I've got my license, sir, but at last reading it didn't say anything about hyper-engines or warp-navigation. Just the usual child's play in three dimensions."
Alfred Lanning looked up with sharp disapproval and snorted the length of his prominent nose.
He said frigidly, "Well, we have our engine men."
Powell caught at his elbow as he walked away, "Sir, is the ship still restricted ground?"
The old director hesitated, then rubbed the bridge of his nose, "I suppose not. For you two anyway."
Donovan looked after him as he left and muttered a short, expressive phrase at his back. He turned to Powell, "I'd like to give him a literary description of himself, Greg."
"Suppose you come along, Mike."
The inside of the ship was finished, as finished as a ship ever was; that could be told in a single eye-blinking glance. No martinet in the system could have put as much spit-and-polish into a surface as those robots had. The walls were of a gleaming silvery finish that retained no fingerprints.
There were no angles; walls, floors, and ceiling faded gently into each other and in the cold, metallic glittering of the hidden lights, one was surrounded by six chilly reflections of one's bewildered self.
The main corridor was a narrow tunnel that led in a hard, clatterfooted stretch along a line of rooms of no interdistinguishing features.
Powell said, "I suppose furniture is built into the wall. Or maybe we're not supposed to sit or sleep."
It was in the last room, the one nearest the nose, that the monotony broke. A curving window of non-reflecting glass was the first break in the universal metal, and below it was a single large dial, with a single motionless needle hard against the zero mark.
Donovan said, "Look at that!" and pointed to the single word on the finely-marked scale.
It said, "Parsecs" and the tiny figure at the right end of the curving, graduated meter said "1,000,000."
There were two chairs; heavy, wide-flaring, uncushioned. Powell seated himself gingerly, and found it molded to the body's curves, and comfortable.
Powell said, "What do you think of it?"
"For my money, The Brain has brain-fever. Let's get out."
"Sure you don't want to look it over a bit?"
"I have looked it over. I came, I saw, I'm through!" Donovan's red hair bristled into separate wires, "Greg, let's get out of here. I quit my job five seconds ago, and this is a restricted area for non-personnel."
Powell smiled in an oily self-satisfied manner and smoothed his mustache, "O.K., Mike, turn off that adrenalin tap you've got draining into your bloodstream. I was worried, too, but no more."
"No more, huh? How come, no more? Increased your insurance?"
"Mike, this ship can't fly."
"How do you know?"
"Well, we've been through the entire ship, haven't we?"
"Seems so."
"Take my word for it, we have. Did you see any pilot room except for this one port and the one gauge here in parsecs? Did you see any controls?"
"No."
"And did you see any engines?"
"Holy Joe, no!"
"Well, then! Let's break the news to Lanning, Mike."
They cursed their way through the featureless corridors and finally hit-and-missed their way into the short passage to the air lock.
Donovan stiffened, "Did you lock this thing, Greg?"
"No, I never touched it. Yank the lever, will you?"
The lever never budged, though Donovan's face twisted appallingly with exertion.
Powell said, "I didn't see any emergency exits. If something's gone wrong here, they'll have to melt us out."
"Yes, and we've got to wait until they find out that some fool has locked us in here," added Donovan, frantically.
"Let's get back to the room with the port. It's the only place from which we might attract attention."
But they didn't.
In that last room, the port was no longer blue and full of sky. It was black, and hard yellow pin-point stars spelled space.
There was a dull, double thud, as two bodies collapsed separately into two chairs.

Alfred Lanning met Dr. Calvin just outside his office. He lit a nervous cigar and motioned her in.
He said, "Well, Susan, we've come pretty far, and Robertson's getting jumpy. What are you doing with The Brain?"
Susan Calvin spread her hands, "It's no use getting impatient. The Brain is worth more than anything we forfeit on this deal."
"But you've been questioning it for two months."
The psychologist's voice was flat, but somehow dangerous, "You would rather run this yourself?"
"Now you know what I meant."
"Oh, I suppose I do," Dr. Calvin rubbed her hands nervously. "It isn't easy. I've been pampering it and probing it gently, and I haven't gotten anywhere yet. Its' reactions aren't normal. Its answers - they're queer, somehow. But nothing I can put my finger on yet. And you see, until we know what's wrong, we must just tiptoe our way through. I can never tell what simple question or remark will just... push him over... and then- Well, and then we'll have on our hands a completely useless Brain. Do you want to face that?"
"Well, it can't break the First Law."
"I would have thought so, but-"
"You're not even sure of that?" Lanning was profoundly shocked.
"Oh, I can't be sure of anything, Alfred-"
The alarm system raised its fearful clangor with a horrifying suddenness. Lanning clicked on communications with an almost paralytic spasm. The breathless words froze him.
He said, "Susan... you heard that... the ship's gone. I sent those two field men inside half an hour ago. You'll have to see The Brain again."

Susan Calvin said with enforced calm, "Brain, what happened to the ship?"
The Brain said happily, "The ship I built, Miss Susan?"
"That's right. What has happened to it?"
"Why, nothing at all. The two men that were supposed to test it were inside, and we were all set. So I sent it off."
"Oh- Well, that's nice." The psychologist felt some difficulty in breathing. "Do you think they'll be all right?"
"Right as anything, Miss Susan. I've taken care of it all. It's a bee-yootiful ship."
"Yes, Brain, it is beautiful, but you think they have enough food, don't you? They'll be comfortable?"
"Plenty of food."
"This business might be a shock to them, Brain. Unexpected, you know."
The Brain tossed it off, "They'll be all right. It ought to be interesting for them."
"Interesting? How?"
"Just interesting," said The Brain, slyly.
"Susan," whispered Lanning in a fuming whisper, "ask him if death comes into it. Ask him what the dangers are."
Susan Calvin's expression contorted with fury, "Keep quiet!" In a shaken voice, she said to The Brain, "We can communicate with the ship, can't we Brain?"
"Oh, they can hear you if you call by radio. I've taken care of that."
"Thanks. That's all for now."
Once outside, Lanning lashed out ragingly, "Great Galaxy, Susan, if this gets out, it will ruin all of us. We've got to get those men back. Why didn't you ask it if there was danger of death - straight out?"
"Because," said Calvin, with a weary frustration, "that's just what I can't mention. If it's got a case of dilemma, it's about death. Anything that would bring it up badly might knock it completely out. Will we be better off then? Now, look, it said we could communicate with them. Let's do so, get their location, and bring them back. They probably can't use the controls themselves; The Brain is probably handling them remotely. Come!"

It was quite a while before Powell shook himself together.
"Mike," he said, out of cold lips, "did you feel an acceleration?"
Donovan's eyes were blank, "Huh? No... no."
And then the redhead's fists clenched and he was out of his seat with sudden frenzied energy and up against the cold, wide-curving glass. There was nothing to see - but stars.
He turned, "Greg, they must have started the machine while we were inside. Greg, it's a put-up job; they fixed it up with the robot to jerry us into being the try-out boys, in case we were thinking of backing out."
Powell said, "What are you talking about? What's the good of sending us out if we don't know how to run the machine? How are we supposed to bring it back? No, this ship left by itself, and without any apparent acceleration." He rose, and walked the floor slowly. The metal walls dinned back the clangor of his steps.
He said tonelessly, "Mike, this is the most confusing situation we've ever been up against."
"That," said Donovan, bitterly, "is news to me. I was just beginning to have a very swell time, when you told me."
Powell ignored that. "No acceleration - which means the ship works on a principle different from any known."
"Different from any we know, anyway."
"Different from any known. There are no engines within reach of manual control. Maybe they're built into the walls. Maybe that's why they're thick as they are."
"What are you mumbling about?" demanded Donovan.
"Why not listen? I'm saying that whatever powers this ship is enclosed, and evidently not meant to be handled. The ship is running by remote control."
"The Brain's control?"
"Why not?"
"Then you think we'll stay out here till The Brain brings us back."
"It could be. If so, let's wait quietly. The Brain is a robot. It's got to follow the First Law. It can't hurt a human being."
Donovan sat down slowly, "You figure that?" Carefully, he flattened his hair, "Listen, this junk about the space-warp knocked out Consolidated's robot, and the longhairs said it was because interstellar travel killed humans. Which robot are you going to trust? Ours had the same data, I understand."
Powell was yanking madly at his mustache, "Don't pretend you don't know your robotics, Mike. Before it's physically possible in any way for a robot to even make a start to breaking the First Law, so many things have to break down that it would be a ruined mess of scrap ten times over. There's some simple explanation to this."
"Oh sure, sure. Just have the butler call me in the morning. It's all just too, too simple for me to bother about before my beauty nap."
"Well, Jupiter, Mike, what are you complaining about so far? The Brain is taking care of us. This place is warm. It's got light. It's got air. There wasn't even enough of an acceleration jar to muss your hair if it were smooth enough to be mussable in the first place."
"Yeah? Greg, you must've taken lessons. No one could put Pollyanna that far out of the running without. What do we eat? What do we drink? Where are we? How do we get back? And in case of accident, to what exit and in what spacesuit do we run, not walk? I haven't even seen a bathroom in the place, or those little conveniences that go along with bathrooms. Sure, we're being taken care of - but good?"
The voice that interrupted Donovan's tirade was not Powell's. It was nobody's. It was there, hanging in open air - stentorian and petrifying in its effects.
"GREGORY POWELL! MICHAEL DONOVAN! GREGORY POWELL! MICHAEL DONOVAN! PLEASE REPORT YOUR PRESENT POSITIONS. IF YOUR SHIP ANSWERS CONTROLS, PLEASE RETURN TO BASE. GREGORY POWELL! MICHAEL DONOVAN!-"
The message was repetitious, mechanical, broken by regular, untiring intervals.
Donovan said, "Where's it coming from?"
"I don't know." Powell's voice was an intense whisper, "Where do the lights come from? Where does anything come from?"
"Well, how are we going to answer?" They had to speak in the intervals between the loudly echoing, repeating message.
The walls were bare - as bare and as unbroken as smooth, curving metal can be. Powell said, "Shout an answer."
They did. They shouted, in turns, and together, "Position unknown! Ship out of control! Condition desperate!"
Their voices rose and cracked. The short businesslike sentences became interlarded and adulterated with screaming and emphatic profanity, but the cold, calling voice repeated and repeated and repeated unwearyingly.
"They don't hear us," gasped Donovan. "There's no sending mechanism. Just a receiver." His eyes focused blindly at a random spot on the wall.
Slowly the din of the outside voice softened and receded. They called again when it was a whisper, and they called again, hoarsely, when there was silence.
Something like fifteen minutes later, Powell said lifelessly, "Let's go through the ship again. There must be something to eat somewheres." He did not sound hopeful. It was almost an admission of defeat.
They divided in the corridor to the right and left. They could follow one another by the hard footsteps resounding, and they met occasionally in the corridor, where they would glare at each other and pass on.
Powell's search ended suddenly and as it did, he heard Donovan's glad voice rise boomingly.
"Hey, Greg," it howled, "the ship has got plumbing. How did we miss it?"
It was some five minutes later that he found Powell by hit-and-miss. He was saying, "Still no shower baths, though," but it got choked off in the middle.
"Food," he gasped.
The wall had dropped away, leaving a curved gap with two shelves. The upper shelf was loaded with unlabeled cans of a bewildering variety of sizes and shapes. The enameled cans on the lower shelf were uniform and Donovan felt a cold draft about his ankles. The lower half was refrigerated.
"How... how-"
"It wasn't there, before," said Powell, curtly. "That wall section dropped out of sight as I came in the door."
He was eating. The can was the preheating type with enclosed spoon and the warm odor of baked beans filled the room. "Grab a can, Mike!"
Donovan hesitated, "What's the menu?"
"How do I know! Are you finicky?"
"No, but all I eat on ships are beans. Something else would be first choice." His hand hovered and selected a shining elliptical can whose flatness seemed reminiscent of salmon or similar delicacy. It opened at the proper pressure.
"Beans!" howled Donovan, and reached for another. Powell hauled at the slack of his pants. "Better eat that, sonny boy. Supplies are limited and we may be here a long, long time."
Donovan drew back sulkily, "Is that all we have? Beans?"
"Could be."
"What's on the lower shelf?"
"Milk."
"Just milk?" Donovan cried in outrage.
"Looks it."
The meal of beans and milk was carried through in silence, and as they left, the strip of hidden wall rose up and formed an unbroken surface once more.
Powell sighed, "Everything automatic. Everything just so. Never felt so helpless in my life. Where's your plumbing?"
"Right there. And that wasn't among those present when we first looked, either."
Fifteen minutes later they were back in the glassed-in room, staring at each other from opposing seats.
Powell looked gloomily at the one gauge in the room. It still said "parsecs," the figures still ended in "1,000,000" and the indicating needle was still pressed hard against the zero mark.
In the innermost offices of the U. S. Robot & Mechanical Men Corp. Alfred Lanning was saying wearily, "They won't answer. We've tried every wavelength, public, private, coded, straight, even this subether stuff they have now. And The Brain still won't say anything?" He shot this at Dr. Calvin.
"It won't amplify on the matter, Alfred," she said, emphatically. "It says they can hear us... and when I try to press it, it becomes... well, it becomes sullen. And it's not supposed to- Whoever heard of a sullen robot?"
"Suppose you tell us what you have, Susan," said Bogert.
"Here it is! It admits it controls the ship itself entirely. It is definitely optimistic about their safety, but without details. I don't dare press it. However, the center of disturbance seems to be about the interstellar jump itself. The Brain definitely laughed when I brought up the subject. There are other indications, but that is the closest it's come to an open abnormality."
She looked at the others, "I refer to hysteria. I dropped the subject immediately, and I hope I did no harm, but it gave me a lead. I can handle hysteria. Give me twelve hours! If I can bring it back to normal, it will bring back the ship."
Bogert seemed suddenly stricken. "The interstellar jump!"
"What's the matter?" The cry was double from Calvin and Lanning.
"The figures for the engine The Brain gave us. Say... I just thought of something."
He left hurriedly.
Lanning gazed after him. He said brusquely to Calvin, "You take care of your end, Susan."

Two hours later, Bogert was talking eagerly, "I tell you, Lanning, that's it. The interstellar jump is not instantaneousnot as long as the speed of light is finite. Life can't exist... matter and energy as such can't exist in the space warp. I don't know what it would be like - but that's it. That's what killed Consolidated's robot."
Donovan felt as haggard as he looked. "Only five days?"
"Only five days. I'm sure of it."
Donovan looked about him wretchedly. The stars through the glass were familiar but infinitely indifferent. The walls were cold to the touch; the lights, which had recently flared up again, were unfeelingly bright; the needle on the gauge pointed stubbornly to zero; and Donovan could not get rid of the taste of beans.
He said, morosely, "I need a bath."
Powell looked up briefly, and said, "So do I. You needn't feel selfconscious. But unless you want to bathe in milk and do without drinking"
"We'll do without drinking eventually, anyway. Greg, where does this interstellar travel come in?'
"You tell me. Maybe we just keep on going. We'd get there, eventually. At least the dust of our skeletons would - but isn't our death the whole point of The Brain's original breakdown?"
Donovan spoke with his back to the other, "Greg, I've been thinking. It's pretty bad. There's not much to do - except walk around or talk to yourself. You know those stories about guys marooned in space. They go nuts long before they starve. I don't know, Greg, but ever since the lights went on, I feel funny."
There was a silence, then Powell's voice came thin and small, "So do I. What's it like?"
The redheaded figure turned, "Feel funny inside. There's a pounding in me with everything tense. It's hard to breathe. I can't stand still."
"Um-m-m. Do you feel vibration?"
"How do you mean?"
"Sit down for a minute and listen. You don't hear it, but you feel it - as if something's throbbing somewheres and it's throbbing the whole ship, and you, too, along with it. Listen-"
"Yeah . . . yeah. What do you think it is, Greg? You don't suppose it's us?"
"It might be." Powell stroked his mustache slowly. "But it might be the ship's engines. It might be getting ready."
"For what?"
"For the interstellar jump. It may be coming and the devil knows what it's like."
Donovan pondered. Then he said, savagely, "If it does, let it. But I wish we could fight. It's humiliating to have to wait for it."
An hour later, perhaps, Powell looked at his hand on the metal chair-arm and said with frozen calm, "Feel the wall, Mike."
Donovan did, and said, "You can feel it shake, Greg."
Even the stars seemed blurred. From somewhere came the vague impression of a huge machine gathering power with the walls, storing up energy for a mighty leap, throbbing its way up the scales of strength.
It came with a suddenness and a stab of pain. Powell stiffened, and half-jerked from his chair. His sight caught Donovan and blanked out while Donovan's thin shout whimpered and died in his ears. Something writhed within him and struggled against a growing blanket of ice, that thickened.
Something broke loose and whirled in a blaze of flickering light and pain. It fell
-and whirled
-and fell headlong
-into silence!
It was death!
It was a world of no motion and no sensation. A world of dim, unsensing consciousness; a consciousness of darkness and of silence and of formless struggle.
Most of all a consciousness of eternity.
He was a tiny white thread of ego - cold and afraid.
Then the words came, unctuous and sonorous, thundering over him in a foam of sound:
"Does your coffin fit differently lately? Why not try Morbid M. Cadaver's extensible caskets? They are scientifically designed to fit the natural curves of the body, and are enriched with Vitamin B1. Use Cadaver's caskets for comfort. Remember - you're - going - to - be - dead - a - long - long - time!"
It wasn't quite sound, but whatever it was, it died away in an oily rumbling whisper.
The white thread that might have been Powell heaved uselessly at the insubstantial eons of time that existed all about him - and collapsed upon itself as the piercing shriek of a hundred million ghosts of a hundred million soprano voices rose to a crescendo of melody:
  "I'll be glad when you're dead, you rascal, you.
  "I'll be glad when you're dead, you rascal, you.
  "I'll be glad-"
It rose up a spiral stairway of violent sound into the keening supersonics that passed hearing, and then beyond-

The white thread quivered with a pulsating pang. It strained quietly-
The voices were ordinary - and many. It was a crowd speaking; a swirling mob that swept through and past and over him with a rapid, headlong motion, that left drifting tatters of words behind them.
"What did they getcha for, boy? Y'look banged up-"
"-a hot fire, I guess, but I got a case-"
"-I've made Paradise, but old St Pete-"
"Naaah, I got a pull with the boy. Had dealings with him-"
"Hey, Sam, come this way-"
"Ja get a mouthpiece? Beelzebub says-"
"-Going on, my good imp? My appointment is with Sa-"
And above it all the original stentorian roar, that plunged across all:
"HURRY! HURRY! HURRY!!! Stir your bones, and don't keep us waiting - there are many more in line. Have your certificates ready, and make sure Peter's release is stamped across it. See if you are at the proper entrance gate. There will be plenty of fire for all. Hey, you - YOU DOWN THERE. TAKE YOUR PLACE IN LINE OR-"
The white thread that was Powell groveled backward before the advancing shout, and felt the sharp stab of the pointing finger. It all exploded into a rainbow of sound that dripped its fragments onto an aching brain.
Powell was in the chair, again. He felt himself shaking.
Donovan's eyes were opening into two large popping bowls of glazed blue.
"Greg," he whispered in what was almost a sob. "Were you dead?"
"I... felt dead." He did not recognize his own croak.
Donovan was obviously making a bad failure of his attempt to stand up, "Are we alive now? Or is there more?"
"I... feel alive." It was the same hoarseness. Powell said cautiously, "Did you... hear anything, when... when you were dead?"
Donovan paused, and then very slowly nodded his head, "Did you?"
"Yes. Did you hear about coffins... and females singing... and the lines forming to get into Hell? Did you?"
Donovan shook his head, "Just one voice."
"Loud?"
"No. Soft, but rough like a file over the fingertips. It was a sermon, you know. About hell-fire. He described the tortures of... well, you know. I once heard a sermon like that - almost."
He was perspiring.

They were conscious of sunlight through the port. It was weak, but it was blue-white - and the gleaming pea that was the distant source of light was not Old Sol.
And Powell pointed a trembling finger at the single gauge. The needle stood stiff and proud at the hairline whose figure read 300,000 parsecs.
Powell said, "Mike if it's true, we must be out of the Galaxy altogether."
Donovan said, "Blazed Greg! We'd be the first men out of the Solar System."
"Yes! That's just it. We've escaped the sun. We've escaped the Galaxy. Mike, this ship is the answer. It means freedom for all humanity - freedom to spread through to every star that exists - millions and billions and trillions of them."
And then he came down with a hard thud, "But how do we get back, Mike?"
Donovan smiled shakily, "Oh, that's all right. The ship brought us here. The ship will take us back. Me for more beans."
"But Mike... hold on, Mike. If it takes us back the way it brought us here-"
Donovan stopped halfway up and sat back heavily into the chair.
Powell went on, "We'll have to... die again, Mike"
"Well," sighed Donovan, "if we have to, we have to. At least it isn't permanent, not very permanent."

Susan Calvin was speaking slowly now. For six hours she had been slowly prodding The Brain - for six fruitless hours. She was weary of repetitions, weary of circumlocutions, weary of everything.
"Now, Brain, there's just one more thing. You must make a special effort to answer simply. Have you been entirely clear about the interstellar jump? I mean does it take them very far?"
"As far as they want to go, Miss Susan. Golly, it isn't any trick through the warp."
"And on the other side, what will they see?"
"Stars and stuff. What do you suppose?"
The next question slipped out, "They'll be alive, then?"
"Sure!"
"And the interstellar jump won't hurt them?"
She froze as The Brain maintained silence. That was it! She had touched the sore spot.
"Brain," she supplicated faintly, "Brain, do you hear me?"
The answer was weak, quivering. The Brain said, "Do I have to answer? About the jump, I mean?"
"Not if you don't want to. But it would be interesting - I mean if you wanted to." Susan Calvin tried to be bright about it.
"Aw-w-w. You spoil everything."
And the psychologist jumped up suddenly, with a look of flaming insight on her face.
"Oh, my," she gasped. "Oh, my."
And she felt the tension of hours and days released in a burst. It was later that she told Lanning, "I tell you it's all right. No, you must leave me alone, now. The ship will be back safely, with the men, and I want to rest. I will rest. Now go away."

The ship returned to Earth as silently, as unjarringly as it had left. It dropped precisely into place and the main lock gaped open. The two men who walked out felt their way carefully and scratched their rough and scrubbily-stubbled chins.
And then, slowly and purposefully, the one with red hair knelt down and planted upon the concrete of the runway a firm, loud kiss.
They waved aside the crowd that was gathering and made gestures of denial at the eager couple that had piled out of the down-swooping ambulance with a stretcher between them.
Gregory Powell said, "Where's the nearest shower?"
They were led away.
They were gathered, all of them, about a table. It was a full staff meeting of the brains of U. S. Robot & Mechanical Men Corp.

Slowly and climactically, Powell and Donovan finished a graphic and resounding story.
Susan Calvin broke the silence that followed. In the few days that had elapsed she bad recovered her icy, somewhat acid, calm - but still a trace of embarrassment broke through.
"Strictly speaking," she said, "this was my fault - all of it. When we first presented this problem to The Brain, as I hope some of you remember, I went to great lengths to impress
upon it the importance of rejecting any item of information capable of creating a dilemma. In doing so I said something like `Don't get excited about the death of humans. We don't
mind it at all. Just give the sheet back and forget it.'"
"Hm-m-m," said Lanning. "What follows?"
"The obvious. When that item entered its calculations which yielded the equation controlling the length of minimum interval for the interstellar jump - it meant death for humans. That's where Consolidated's machine broke down completely. But I had depressed the importance of death to The Brain - not entirely, for the First Law can never be broken - but just sufficiently so that The Brain could take a second look at the equation. Sufficiently to give it time to realize that after the interval was passed through, the men would return to life - just as the matter and energy of the ship itself would return to being. This so-called `death,' in other words, was a strictly temporary phenomenon. You see?"
She looked about her. They were all listening.
She went on, "So he accepted the item, but not without a certain jar. Even with death temporary and its importance depressed, it was enough to unbalance him very gently."
She brought it out calmly, "He developed a sense of humor - it's an escape, you see, a method of partial escape from reality. He became a practical joker."
Powell and Donovan were on their feet.
"What?" cried Powell.
Donovan was considerably more colorful about it.
"It's so," said Calvin. "He took care of you, and kept you safe, but you couldn't handle any controls, because they weren't for you - just for the humorous Brain. We could reach you by radio, but you couldn't answer. You had plenty of food, but all of it beans and milk. Then you died, so to speak, and were reborn, but the period of your death was made... well... interesting. I wish I knew how he did it. It was The Brain's prize joke, but he meant no harm."
"No harm!" gasped Donovan. "Oh, if that cute little tyke only had a neck."
Lanning raised a quieting hand, "All right, it's been a mess, but it's all over. What now?"
"Well," said Bogert, quietly, "obviously it's up to us to improve the space-warp engine. There must be some way of getting around that interval of jump. If there is, we're the only organization left with a grand-scale super-robot, so we're bound to find it if anyone can. And then - U. S. Robots has interstellar travel, and humanity has the opportunity for galactic empire."
"What about Consolidated?" said Lanning.
"Hey," interrupted Donovan suddenly, "I want to make a suggestion there. They landed U. S. Robots into quite a mess. It wasn't as bad a mess as they expected and it turned out well, but their intentions weren't pious. And Greg and I bore the most of it.
"Well, they wanted an answer, and they've got one. Send them that ship, guaranteed, and U. S. Robots can collect their two hundred thou plus construction costs. And if they test it - then suppose we let The Brain have just a little more fun before it's brought back to normal."
Lanning said gravely, "It sounds just and proper to me."
To which Bogert added absently, "Strictly according to contract, too."

---
Evidence
---

"BUT THAT WASN'T IT, EITHER," SAID DR. CALVIN thoughtfully. "Oh, eventually, the ship and others like it became government property; the Jump through hyperspace was perfected, and now we actually have human colonies on the planets of some of the nearer stars, but that wasn't it."
I had finished eating and watched her through the smoke of my cigarette.
"It's what has happened to the people here on Earth in the last fifty years that really counts. When I was born, young man, we had just gone through the last World War. It was a low point in history - but it was the end of nationalism. Earth was too small for nations and they began grouping themselves into Regions. It took quite a while. When I was born the United States of America was still a nation and not merely a part of the Northern Region. In fact, the name of the corporation is still 'United States Robots-.' And the change from nations to Regions, which has stabilized our economy and brought about what amounts to a Golden Age, when this century is compared with the last, was also brought about by our robots."
"You mean the Machines," I said. "The Brain you talked about was the first of the Machines, wasn't it?"
"Yes, it was, but it's not the Machines I was thinking of. Rather of a man. He died last year." Her voice was suddenly deeply sorrowful. "Or at least he arranged to die, because he knew we needed him no longer. Stephen Byerley."
"Yes, I guessed that was who you meant."
"He first entered public office in 2032. You were only a boy then, so you wouldn't remember the strangeness of it. His campaign for the Mayoralty was certainly the queerest in history-!"

Francis Quinn was a politician of the new school. That, of course, is a meaningless expression, as are all expressions of the sort. Most of the "new schools" we have were duplicated in the social life of ancient Greece, and perhaps, if we knew more about it, in the social life of ancient Sumeria and in the lake dwellings of prehistoric Switzerland as well.
But, to get out from under what promises to be a dull and complicated beginning, it might be best to state hastily that Quinn neither ran for office nor canvassed for votes, made no speeches and stuffed no ballot boxes. Any more than Napoleon pulled a trigger at Austerlitz.
And since politics makes strange bedfellows, Alfred Lanning sat at the other side of the desk with his ferocious white eyebrows bent far forward over eyes in which chronic impatience had sharpened to acuity. He was not pleased.
The fact, if known to Quinn, would have annoyed him not the least. His voice was friendly, perhaps professionally so.
"I assume you know Stephen Byerley, Dr. Lanning."
"I have heard of him. So have many people."
"Yes, so have I. Perhaps you intend voting for him at the next election."
"I couldn't say." There was an unmistakable trace of acidity here. "I have not followed the political currents, so I'm not aware that he is running for office."
"He may be our next mayor. Of course, he is only a lawyer now, but great oaks-"
"Yes," interrupted Lanning, "I have heard the phrase before. But I wonder if we can get to the business at hand."
"We are at the business at hand, Dr. Lanning." Quinn's tone was very gentle, "It is to my interest to keep Mr. Byerley a district attorney at the very most, and it is to your interest to help me do so."
"To my interest? Come!" Lanning's eyebrows hunched low.
"Well, say then to the interest of the U. S. Robot & Mechanical Men Corporation. I come to you as Director Emeritus of Research, because I know that your connection to them is that of, shall we say, `elder statesman.' You are listened to with respect and yet your connection with them is no longer so tight but that you cannot possess considerable freedom of action; even if the action is somewhat unorthodox."
Dr. Lanning was silent a moment, chewing the cud of his thoughts. He said more softly, "I don't follow you at all, Mr. Quinn."
"I am not surprised, Dr. Lanning. But it's all rather simple. Do you mind?" Quinn lit a slender cigarette with a lighter of tasteful simplicity and his big-boned face settled into an expression of quiet amusement. "We have spoken of Mr. Byerley - a strange and colorful character. He was unknown three years ago. He is very well known now. He is a man of force and ability, and certainly the most capable and intelligent prosecutor I have ever known. Unfortunately he is not a friend of mine"
"I understand," said Lanning, mechanically. He stared at his fingernails.
"I have had occasion," continued Quinn, evenly, "in the past year to investigate Mr. Byerley - quite exhaustively. It is always useful, you see, to subject the past life of reform politicians to rather inquisitive research. If you knew how often it helped-" He paused to smile humorlessly at the glowing tip of his cigarette. "But Mr. Byerley's past is unremarkable. A quiet life in a small town, a college education, a wife who died young, an auto accident with a slow recovery, law school, coming to the metropolis, an attorney."
Francis Quinn shook his head slowly, then added, "But his present life. Ah, that is remarkable. Our district attorney never eats!"
Lanning's head snapped up, old eyes surprisingly sharp, "Pardon me?"
"Our district attorney never eats." The repetition thumped by syllables. "I'll modify that slightly. He has never been seen to eat or drink. Never! Do you understand the significance of the word? Not rarely, but never!"
"I find that quite incredible. Can you trust your investigators?"
"I can trust my investigators, and I don't find it incredible at all. Further, our district attorney has never been seen to drink -in the aqueous sense as well as the alcoholic- nor to sleep. There are other factors, but I should think I have made my point."

Lanning leaned back in his seat, and there was the rapt silence of challenge and response between them, and then the old roboticist shook his head. "No. There is only one thing you can be trying to imply, if I couple your statements with the fact that you present them to me, and that is impossible."
"But the man is quite inhuman, Dr. Lanning."
"If you told me he were Satan in masquerade, there would be a faint chance that I might believe you."
"I tell you he is a robot, Dr. Lanning."
"I tell you it is as impossible a conception as I have ever heard, Mr. Quinn."
Again the combative silence.
"Nevertheless," and Quinn stubbed out his cigarette with elaborate care, "you will have to investigate this impossibility with all the resources of the Corporation."
"I'm sure that I could undertake no such thing, Mr. Quinn. You don't seriously suggest that the Corporation take part in local politics."
"You have no choice. Supposing I were to make my facts public without proof. The evidence is circumstantial enough."
"Suit yourself in that respect."
"But it would not suit me. Proof would be much preferable. And it would not suit you, for the publicity would be very damaging to your company. You are perfectly well acquainted, I suppose, with the strict rules against the use of robots on inhabited worlds."
"Certainly!" -brusquely.
"You know that the U. S. Robot & Mechanical Men Corporation is the only manufacturer of positronic robots in the Solar System, and if Byerley is a robot, he is a positronic robot. You are also aware that all positronic robots are leased, and not sold; that the Corporation remains the owner and manager of each robot, and is therefore responsible for the actions of all."
"It is an easy matter, Mr. Quinn, to prove the Corporation has never manufactured a robot of a humanoid character."
"It can be done? To discuss merely possibilities."
"Yes. It can be done."
"Secretly, I imagine, as well. Without entering it in your books."
"Not the positronic brain, sir. Too many factors are involved in that, and there is the tightest possible government supervision."
"Yes, but robots are worn out, break down, go out of order - and are dismantled."
"And the positronic brains re-used or destroyed."
"Really?" Francis Quinn allowed himself a trace of sarcasm. "And if one were, accidentally, of course, not destroyed - and there happened to be a humanoid structure waiting for a brain."
"Impossible!"
"You would have to prove that to the government and the public, so why not prove it to me now."
"But what could our purpose be?" demanded Lanning in exasperation. "Where is our motivation? Credit us with a minimum of sense."
"My dear sir, please. The Corporation would be only too glad to have the various Regions permit the use of humanoid positronic robots on inhabited worlds. The profits would be enormous. But the prejudice of the public against such a practice is too great. Suppose you get them used to such robots first - see, we have a skillful lawyer, a good mayor,and he is a robot. Won't you buy our robot butlers?"
"Thoroughly fantastic. An almost humorous descent to the ridiculous."
"I imagine so. Why not prove it? Or would you still rather try to prove it to the public?"
The light in the office was dimming, but it was not yet too dim to obscure the flush of frustration on Alfred Lanning's face. Slowly, the roboticist's finger touched a knob and the wall illuminators glowed to gentle life.
"Well, then," he growled, "let us see."
The face of Stephen Byerley is not an easy one to describe. He was forty by birth certificate and forty by appearance - but it was a healthy, well-nourished good-natured appearance of forty; one that automatically drew the teeth of the bromide about "looking one's age."
This was particularly true when he laughed, and he was laughing now. It came loudly and continuously, died away for a bit, then began again-
And Alfred Lanning's face contracted into a rigidly bitter monument of disapproval. He made a half gesture to the woman who sat beside him, but her thin, bloodless lips merely pursed themselves a trifle.
Byerley gasped himself a stage nearer normality.
"Really, Dr. Lanning... really- I... I... a robot?"
Lanning bit his words off with a snap, "It is no statement of mine, sir. I would be quite satisfied to have you a member of humanity. Since our corporation never manufactured you, I am quite certain that you are - in a legalistic sense, at any rate. But since the contention that you are a robot has been advanced to us seriously by a man of certain standing-"
"Don't mention his name, if it would knock a chip off your granite block of ethics, but let's pretend it was Frank Quinn, for the sake of argument, and continue."
Lanning drew in a sharp, cutting snort at the interruption, and paused ferociously before continuing with added frigidity, "-by a man of certain standing, with whose identity I am not interested in playing guessing games, I am bound to ask your cooperation in disproving it. The mere fact that such a contention could be advanced and publicized by the means at this man's disposal would be a bad blow to the company I represent - even if the charge were never proven. You understand me?"
"Oh, yes, your position is clear to me. The charge itself is ridiculous. The spot you find yourself in is not. I beg your pardon, if my laughter offended you. It was the first I laughed at, not the second. How can I help you?"
"It could be very simple. You have only to sit down to a meal at a restaurant in the presence of witnesses, have your picture taken, and eat." Lanning sat back in his chair, the worst of the interview over. The woman beside him watched Byerley with an apparently absorbed expression but contributed nothing of her own.
Stephen Byerley met her eyes for an instant, was caught by them, then turned back to the roboticist. For a while his fingers were thoughtful over the bronze paper-weight that was the only ornament on his desk.
He said quietly, "I don't think I can oblige you."
He raised his hand, "Now wait, Dr. Lanning. I appreciate the fact that this whole matter is distasteful to you, that you have been forced into it against your will, that you feel you are playing an undignified and even ridiculous part. Still, the matter is even more intimately concerned with myself, so be tolerant.
"First, what makes you think that Quinn -this man of certain standing, you know- wasn't hoodwinking you, in order to get you to do exactly what you are doing?"
"Why it seems scarcely likely that a reputable person would endanger himself in so ridiculous a fashion, if he weren't convinced he were on safe ground."
There was little humor in Byerley's eyes, "You don't know Quinn. He could manage to make safe ground out of a ledge a mountain sheep could not handle. I suppose be showed the particulars of the investigation he claims to have made of me?"
"Enough to convince me that it would be too troublesome to have our corporation attempt to disprove them when you could do so more easily."
"Then you believe him when he says I never eat. You are a scientist, Dr. Lanning. Think of the logic required. I have not been observed to eat, therefore, I never eat Q.E.D. After all!"
"You are using prosecution tactics to confuse what is really a very simple situation."
"On the contrary, I am trying to clarify what you and Quinn between you are making a very complicated one. You see, I don't sleep much, that's true, and I certainly don't sleep in public. I have never cared to eat with others - an idiosyncrasy which is unusual and probably neurotic in character, but which harms no one. Look, Dr. Lanning, let me present you with a suppositious case. Supposing we had a politician who was interested in defeating a reform candidate at any cost and while investigating his private life came across oddities such as I have just mentioned.
"Suppose further that in order to smear the candidate effectively, he comes to your company as the ideal agent. Do you expect him to say to you, 'So-and-so is a robot because he hardly ever eats with people, and I have never seen him fall asleep in the middle of a case; and once when I peeped into his window in the middle of the night, there he was, sitting up with a book; and I looked in his frigidaire and there was no food in it.'
"If he told you that, you would send for a straitjacket. But if he tells you, 'He never sleeps; he never eats,' then the shock of the statement blinds you to the fact that such statements are impossible to prove. You play into his hands by contributing to the to-do."
"Regardless, sir," began Lanning, with a threatening obstinacy, "of whether you consider this matter serious or not, it will require only the meal I mentioned to end it."
Again Byerley turned to the woman, who still regarded him expressionlessly. "Pardon me. I've caught your name correctly, haven't I? Dr. Susan Calvin?"
"Yes, Mr. Byerley."
"You're the U. S. Robot's psychologist, aren't you?"
"Robopsychologist, please."
"Oh, are robots so different from men, mentally?"
"Worlds different." She allowed herself a frosty smile, "Robots are essentially decent."
Humor tugged at the corners of the lawyer's mouth, "Well, that's a hard blow. But what I wanted to say was this. Since you're a psycho- a robopsychologist, and a woman, I'll bet that you've done something that Dr. Lanning hasn't thought of."
"And what is that?"
"You've got something to eat in your purse."
Something caught in the schooled indifference of Susan Calvin's eyes. She said, "You surprise me, Mr. Byerley."
And opening her purse, she produced an apple. Quietly, she handed it to him. Dr. Lanning, after an initial start, followed the slow movement from one hand to the other with sharply alert eyes.
Calmly, Stephen Byerley bit into it, and calmly he swallowed it
"You see, Dr. Lanning?"
Dr. Lanning smiled in a relief tangible enough to make even his eyebrows appear benevolent A relief that survived for one fragile second.
Susan Calvin said, "I was curious to see if you would eat it, but, of course, in the present case, it proves nothing."
Byerley grinned, "It doesn't?"
"Of course not. It is obvious, Dr. Lanning, that if this man were a humanoid robot, he would be a perfect imitation. He is almost too human to be credible. After all, we have been seeing and observing human beings all our lives; it would be impossible to palm something merely nearly right off on us. It would have to be all right. Observe the texture of the skin, the quality of the irises, the bone formation of the hand. If he's a robot, I wish U. S. Robots had made him, because he's a good job. Do you suppose then, that anyone capable of paying attention to such niceties would neglect a few gadgets to take care of such things as eating, sleeping, elimination? For emergency use only, perhaps; as, for instance, to prevent such situations as are arising here. So a meal won't really prove anything."
"Now wait," snarled Lanning, "I am - not quite the fool both of you make me out to be. I am not interested in the problem of Mr. Byerley's humanity or nonhumanity. I am interest in getting the corporation out of a hole. A public meal will end the matter and keep it ended no matter what Quinn does. We can leave the finer details to lawyers and robopsychologists."
"But, Dr. Lanning," said Byerley, "you forget the politics of the situation. I am as anxious to be elected as Quinn is to stop me. By the way, did you notice that you used his name? It's a cheap shyster trick of mine; I knew you would, before you were through."
Lanning flushed, "What has the election to do with it?"
"Publicity works both ways, sir. If Quinn wants to call me a robot, and has the nerve to do so, I have the nerve to play the game his way."
"You mean you-" Lanning was quite frankly appalled.
"Exactly. I mean that I'm going to let him go ahead, choose his rope, test its strength, cut off the right length, tie the noose, insert his head and grin. I can do what little else is required."
"You are mighty confident."
Susan Calvin rose to her feet, "Come, Alfred, we won't change his mind for him."
"You see." Byerley smiled gently. "You're a human psychologist, too."

But perhaps not all the confidence that Dr. Lanning had remarked upon was present that evening when Byerley's car parked on the automatic treads leading to the sunken garage,
and Byerley himself crossed the path to the front door of his house.
The figure in the wheel chair looked up as he entered and smiled. Byerley's face lit with affection. He crossed over to it.
The cripple's voice was a hoarse, grating whisper that came out of a mouth forever twisted to one side, leering out of a face that was half scar tissue, "You're late, Steve."
"I know, John, I know. But I've been up against a peculiar and interesting trouble today."
"So?" Neither the torn face nor the destroyed voice could carry expression but there was anxiety in the clear eyes. "Nothing you can't handle?"
"I'm not exactly certain. I may need your help. You're the brilliant one in the family. Do you want me to take you out into the garden? It's a beautiful evening."
Two strong arms lifted John from the wheel chair. Gently, almost caressingly, Byerley's arms went around the shoulders and under the swathed legs of the cripple. Carefully, and slowly, he walked through the rooms, down the gentle ramp that had been built with a wheel chair in mind, and out the back door into the walled and wired garden behind the house.
"Why don't you let me use the wheel chair, Steve? This is Silly."
"Because I'd rather carry you. Do you object? You know that you're as glad to get out of that motorized buggy for a while as I am to see you out. How do you feel today?" He deposited John with infinite care upon the cool grass.
"How should I feel? But tell me about your troubles."
"Quinn's campaign will be based on the fact that he claims I'm a robot."
John's eyes opened wide, "How do you know? It's impossible. I won't believe it."
"Oh, come, I tell you it's so. He had one of the big-shot scientists of U. S. Robot & Mechanical Men Corporation over at the office to argue with me."
Slowly John's hands tore at the grass, "I see. I see."
Byerley said, "But we can let him choose his ground. I have an idea. Listen to me and tell me if we can do it "

The scene as it appeared in Alfred Lanning's office that night was a tableau of stares. Francis Quinn stared meditatively at Alfred Lanning. Lanning's stare was savagely set upon Susan Calvin, who stared impassively in her turn at Quinn.
Francis Quinn broke it with a heavy attempt at lightness, "Bluff. He's making it up as he goes along."
"Are you going to gamble on that, Mr. Quinn?" asked Dr. Calvin, indifferently.
"Well, it's your gamble, really."
"Look here," Lanning covered definite pessimism with bluster, "we've done what you asked. We witnessed the man eat. It's ridiculous to presume him a robot."
"Do you think so?" Quinn shot toward Calvin. "Lanning said you were the expert."
Lanning was almost threatening, "Now, Susan-"
Quinn interrupted smoothly, "Why not let her talk, man? She's been sitting there imitating a gatepost for half an hour."
Lanning felt definitely harassed. From what he experienced then to incipient paranoia was but a step. He said, "Very well. Have your say, Susan. We won't interrupt you."
Susan Calvin glanced at him humorlessly, then fixed cold eyes on Mr. Quinn. "There are only two ways of definitely proving Byerley to be a robot, sir. So far you are presenting circumstantial evidence, with which you can accuse, but not prove - and I think Mr. Byerley is sufficiently clever to counter that sort of material. You probably think so yourself, or you wouldn't have come here.
"The two methods of proof are the physical and the psychological. Physically, you can dissect him or use an X-ray. How to do that would be your problem. Psychologically, his behavior can be studied, for if he is a positronic robot, he must conform to the three Rules of Robotics. A positronic brain can not be constructed without them. You know the Rules, Mr. Quinn?"
She spoke them carefully, clearly, quoting word for word the famous bold print on page one of the "Handbook of Robotics."
"I've heard of them," said Quinn, carelessly.
"Then the matter is easy to follow," responded the psychologist, dryly. "If Mr. Byerley breaks any of those three rules, he is not a robot. Unfortunately, this procedure works in only one direction. If he lives up to the rules, it proves nothing one way or the other."
Quinn raised polite eyebrows, "Why not, doctor?"
"Because, if you stop to think of it, the three Rules of Robotics are the essential guiding principles of a good many of the world's ethical systems. Of course, every human being is supposed to have the instinct of self-preservation. That's Rule Three to a robot. Also every 'good' human being, with a social conscience and a sense of responsibility, is supposed to defer to proper authority; to listen to his doctor, his boss, his government, his psychiatrist, his fellow man; to obey laws, to follow rules, to conform to custom - even when they interfere with his comfort or his safety. That's Rule Two to a robot. Also, every 'good' human being is supposed to love others as himself, protect his fellow man, risk his life to save another. That's Rule One to a robot. To put it simply - if Byerley follows all the Rules of Robotics, he may be a robot, and may simply be a very good man."
"But," said Quinn, "you're telling me that you can never prove him a robot."
"I may be able to prove him not a robot"
"That's not the proof I want."
"You'll have such proof as exists. You are the only one responsible for your own wants."

Here Lanning's mind leaped suddenly to the sting of an idea, "Has it occurred to anyone," he ground out, "that district attorney is a rather strange occupation for a robot? The prosecution of human beings - sentencing them to death - bringing about their infinite harm-"
Quinn grew suddenly keen, "No, you can't get out of it that way. Being district attorney doesn't make him human. Don't you know his record? Don't you know that he boasts that he has never prosecuted an innocent man; that there are scores of people left untried because the evidence against them didn't satisfy him, even though he could probably have argued a jury into atomizing them? That happens to be so."
Tanning's thin cheeks quivered, "No, Quinn, no. There is nothing in the Rules of Robotics that makes any allowance for human guilt. A robot may not judge whether a human being deserves death. It is not for him to decide. He may not harm a human-variety skunk, or variety angel."
Susan Calvin sounded tired. "Alfred," she said, "don't talk foolishly. What if a robot came upon a madman about to set fire to a house with people in it He would stop the madman, wouldn't he?"
"Of course."
"And if the only way he could stop him was to kill him-"

There was a faint sound in Lanning's throat. Nothing more.
"The answer to that, Alfred, is that he would do his best not to kill him. If the madman died, the robot would require psychotherapy because he might easily go mad at the conflict presented him -of having broken Rule One to adhere to Rule One in a higher sense. But a man would be dead and a robot would have killed him."
"Well, is Byerley mad?" demanded Lanning, with all the sarcasm he could muster.
"No, but he has killed no man himself. He has exposed facts which might represent a particular human being to be dangerous to the large mass of other human beings we call society. He protects the greater number and thus adheres to Rule One at maximum potential. That is as far as he goes. It is the judge who then condemns the criminal to death or imprisonment, after the jury decides on his guilt or innocence. It is the jailer who imprisons him, the executioner who kills him. And Mr. Byerley has done nothing but determine truth and aid society.
"As a matter of fact, Mr. Quinn, I have looked into Mr. Byerley's career since you first brought this matter to our attention. I find that he has never demanded the death sentence in his closing speeches to the jury. I also find that he has spoken on behalf of the abolition of capital punishment and contributed generously to research institutions engaged in criminal neurophysiology. He apparently believes in the cure, rather than the punishment of crime. I find that significant."
"You do?" Quinn smiled. "Significant of a certain odor of roboticity, perhaps?"
"Perhaps. Why deny it? Actions such as his could come only from a robot, or from a very honorable and decent human being. But you see, you just can't differentiate between a robot and the very best of humans."
Quinn sat back in his chair. His voice quivered with impatience. "Dr. Lanning, it's perfectly possible to create a humanoid robot that would perfectly duplicate a human in appearance, isn't it?"
Lanning harrumphed and considered, "It's been done experimentally by U. S. Robots," he said reluctantly, "without the addition of a positronic brain, of course. By using human ova and hormone control, one can grow human flesh and skin over a skeleton of porous silicone plastics that would defy external examination. The eyes, the hair, the skin would
be really human, not humanoid. And if you put a positronic brain, and such other gadgets as you might desire inside, you have a humanoid robot."
Quinn said shortly, "How long would it take to make one?"
Lanning considered, "If you had all your equipment - the brain, the skeleton, the ovum, the proper hormones and radiations - say, two months."
The politician straightened out of his chair. "Then we shall see what the insides of Mr. Byerley look like. It will mean publicity for U. S. Robots - but I gave you your chance."
Lanning turned impatiently to Susan Calvin, when they were alone. "Why do you insist-"
And with real feeling, she responded sharply and instantly, "Which do you want - the truth or my resignation? I won't lie for you. U. S. Robots can take care of itself. Don't turn coward."
"What,", said Lanning, "if he opens up Byerley, and wheels and gears fall out what then?"
"He won't open Byerley," said Calvin, disdainfully. "Byerley is as clever as Quinn, at the very least"

The news broke upon the city a week before Byerley was to have been nominated. But "broke" is the wrong word. It staggered upon the city, shambled, crawled. Laughter began, and wit was free. And as the far off hand of Quinn tightened its pressure in easy stages, the laughter grew forced, an element of hollow uncertainty entered, and people broke off to wonder.
The convention itself had the sir of a restive stallion. There had been no contest planned. Only Byerley could possibly have been nominated a week earlier. There was no substitute even now. They had to nominate him, but there was complete confusion about it.
It would not have been so bad if the average individual were not torn between the enormity of the charge, if true, and its sensational folly, if false.
The day after Byerley was nominated perfunctorily, hollowly - a newspaper finally published the gist of a long interview with Dr. Susan Calvin, "world famous expert on robopsychology and positronics."
What broke loose is popularly and succinctly described as hell.
It was what the Fundamentalists were waiting for. They were not a political party; they made pretense to no formal religion. Essentially they were those who had not adapted themselves to what had once been called the Atomic Age, in the days when atoms were a novelty. Actually, they were the Simple-Lifers, hungering after a life, which to those who lived it had probably appeared not so Simple, and who had been, therefore, Simple-Lifers themselves.
The Fundamentalists required no new reason to detest robots and robot manufacturers; but a new reason such as the Quinn accusation and the Calvin analysis was sufficient to make such detestation audible.
The huge plants of the U. S. Robot & Mechanical Men Corporation was a hive that spawned armed guards. It prepared for war.
Within the city the house of Stephen Byerley bristled with police.
The political campaign, of course, lost all other issues, and resembled a campaign only in that it was something filling the hiatus between nomination and election.

Stephen Byerley did not allow the fussy little man to distract him. He remained comfortably unperturbed by the uniforms in the background. Outside the house, past the line of grim guards, reporters and photographers waited according to the tradition of the caste. One enterprising 'visor station even had a scanner focused on the blank entrance to the prosecutor's unpretentious home, while a synthetically excited announcer filled in with inflated commentary.
The fussy little man advanced. He held forward a rich, complicated sheet. "This, Mr. Byerley, is a court order authorizing me to search these premises for the presence of illegal... uh... mechanical men or robots of any description."
Byerley half rose, and took the paper. He glanced at it indifferently, and smiled as he handed it back. "All in order. Go ahead. Do your job. Mrs. Hoppen" - to his housekeeper, who appeared reluctantly from the next room - "please go with them, and help out if you can."
The little man, whose name was Harroway, hesitated, produced an unmistakable blush, failed completely to catch Byerley's eyes, and muttered, "Come on," to the two policemen.
He was back in ten minutes.
"Through?" questioned Byerley, in just the tone of a person who is not particularly interested in the question, or its answer.
Harroway cleared his throat, made a bad start in falsetto, and began again, angrily, "Look here, Mr. Byerley, our special instructions were to search the house very thoroughly."
"And haven't you?"
"We were told exactly what to look for."
"Yes?"
"In short, Mr. Byerley, and not to put too fine a point on it, we were told to search you."
"Me?" said the prosecutor with a broadening smile. "And how do you intend to do that?"
"We have a Penet-radiation unit-"
"Then I'm to have my X-ray photograph taken, hey? You have the authority?"
"You saw my warrant."
"May I see it again?"
Harroway, his forehead shining with considerably more than mere enthusiasm, passed it over a second time.
Byerley said evenly, "I read here as the description of what you are to search; I quote: 'the dwelling place belonging to Stephen Allen Byerley, located at 355 Willow Grove, Evanstron, together, with any garage, storehouse or other structures or buildings thereto appertaining, together with all grounds thereto appertaining'... um... and so on. Quite in order. But, my good man, it doesn't say anything about searching my interior. I am not part of the premises. You may search my clothes if you think I've got a robot hidden in my pocket."
Harroway had no doubt on the point of to whom he owed his job. He did not propose to be backward, given a chance to earn a much better - i.e., more highly paid-job.
He said, in a faint echo of bluster, "Look here. I'm allowed to search the furniture in your house, and anything else I find in it. You are in it, aren't you?"
"A remarkable observation. I am in it. But I'm not a piece of furniture. As a citizen of adult responsiblity - I have the psychiatric certificate proving that - I have certain rights under the Regional Articles. Searching me would come under the heading of violating my Right of Privacy. That paper isn't sufficient."
"Sure, but if you're a robot, you don't have Right of Privacy."
"True enough but that paper still isn't sufficient. It recognizes me implicitly as a human being."
"Where?" Harroway snatched at it.
"Where it says 'the dwelling place belonging to' and so on. A robot cannot own property. And you may tell your employer, Mr. Harroway, that if he tries to issue a similar paper which does not implicitly recognize me as a human being, he will be immediately faced with a restraining injunction and a civil suit which will make it necessary for him to prove me a robot by means of information now in his possession, or else to pay a whopping penalty for an attempt to deprive me unduly of my Rights under the Regional Articles. You'll tell him that, won't you?"
Harroway marched to the door. He turned. . "You're a slick lawyer-" His hand was in his pocket. For a short moment, he stood there. Then he left, smiled in the direction of the 'visor scanner, still playing away-waved to the reporters, and shouted, "We'll have something for you tomorrow, boys. No kidding."
In his ground car, he settled back, removed the tiny mechanism from his pocket and carefully inspected it. It was the first time he had ever taken a photograph by X-ray reflection. He hoped he had done it correctly.
Quinn and Byerley had never met face-to-face alone. But visorphone was pretty close to it. In fact, accepted literally, perhaps the phrase was accurate, even if to each, the other were merely the light and dark pattern of a bank of photocells.
It was Quinn who had initiated the call. It was Quinn, who spoke first, and without particular ceremony, "Thought you would like to know, Byerley, that I intend to make public the fact that you're wearing a protective shield against Penet-radiation."
"That so? In that case, you've probably already made it public. I have a notion our enterprising press representatives have been tapping my various communication lines for quite a while. I know they have my office lines full of holes; which is why I've dug in at my home these last weeks." Byerley was friendly, almost chatty.
Quinn's lips tightened slightly, "This call is shielded - thoroughly. I'm making it at a certain personal risk."
"So I should imagine. Nobody knows you're behind this campaign. At least, nobody knows it officially. Nobody doesn't know it unofficially. I wouldn't worry. So I wear a
protective shield? I suppose you found that out when your puppy dog's Penet-radiation photograph, the other day, turned out to be overexposed."
"You realize, Byerley, that it would be pretty obvious to everyone that you don't dare face X-ray analysis."
"Also that you, or your men, attempted illegal invasion of my Rights of Privacy."
"The devil they'll care for that."
"They might. It's rather symbolic of our two campaigns isn't it? You have little concern with the rights of the individual citizen. I have great concern. I will not submit to X-ray analysis, because I wish to maintain my Rights on principle. Just as I'll maintain the rights of others when elected."
"That will, no doubt make a very interesting speech, but no one will believe you. A little too high-sounding to be true. Another thing," a sudden, crisp change, "the personnel in your home was not complete the other night."
"In what way?"
"According to the report," he shuffled papers before him that were just within the range of vision of the visiplate, "there was one person missing - a cripple."
"As you say," said Byerley, tonelessly, "a cripple. My old teacher, who lives with me and who is now in the country - and has been for two months. A `much-needed rest' is the usual expression applied in the case. He has your permission?"
"Your teacher? A scientist of sorts?"
"A lawyer once - before he was a cripple. He has a government license as a research biophysicist, with a laboratory of his own, and a complete description of the work he's doing filed with the proper authorities, to whom I can refer you. The work is minor, but is a harmless and engaging hobby for a - poor cripple. I am being as helpful as I can, you see."
"I see. And what does this... teacher... know about robot manufacture?"
"I couldn't judge the extent of his knowledge in a field with which I am unacquainted."
"He wouldn't have access to positronic brains?"
"Ask your friends at U. S. Robots. They'd be the ones to know."
"I'll put it shortly, Byerley. Your crippled teacher is the real Stephen Byerley. You are his robot creation. We can prove it. It was he who was in the automobile accident, not you. There will be ways of checking the records."
"Really? Do so, then. My best wishes."
"And we can search your so-called teacher's 'country place,' and see what we can find there."
"Well, not quite, Quinn." Byerley smiled broadly. "Unfortunately for you, my so-called teacher is a sick man. His country place is his place of rest. His Right of Privacy as a citizen of adult responsibility is naturally even stronger, under the circumstances. You won't be able to obtain a warrant to enter his grounds without showing just cause. However, I'd be the last to prevent you from trying."
There was a pause of moderate length, and then Quinn leaned forward, so that his imaged-face expanded and the fine lines on his forehead were visible, "Byerley, why do you carry on? You can't be elected."
"Can't I?"
"Do you think you can? Do you suppose that your failure to make any attempt to disprove the robot charge - when you could easily, by breaking one of the Three Laws - does anything but convince the people that you are a robot?"
"All I see so far is that from being a rather vaguely known, but still largely obscure metropolitan lawyer, I have now become a world figure. You're a good publicist."
"But you are a robot."
"So it's been said, but not proven."
"It's been proven sufficiently for the electorate."
"Then relax you've won."
"Good-by," said Quinn, with his first touch of viciousness, and the visorphone slammed off.
"Good-by," said Byerley imperturbably, to the blank plate.

Byerley brought his "teacher" back the week before election. The air car dropped quickly in an obscure part of the city.
"You'll stay here till after election," Byerley told him. "It would be better to have you out of the way if things take a bad turn."
The hoarse voice that twisted painfully out of John's crooked mouth might have had accents of concern in it. "There's danger of violence?"
"The Fundamentalists threaten it, so I suppose there is, in a theoretical sense. But I really don't expect it. The Fundies have no real power. They're just the continuous irritant factor that might stir up a riot after a while. You don't mind staying here? Please. I won't be myself if I have to worry about you."
"Oh, I'll stay. You still think it will go well?"
"I'm sure of it. No one bothered you at the place?"
"No one. I'm certain."
"And your part went well?"
"Well enough. There'll be no trouble there."
"Then take care of yourself, and watch the televisor tomorrow, John." Byerley pressed the gnarled hand that rested on his.
Lenton's forehead was a furrowed study in suspense. He had the completely unenviable job of being Byerley's campaign manager in a campaign that wasn't a campaign, for a person that refused to reveal his strategy, and refused to accept his manager's.
"You can't!" It was his favorite phrase. It had become his only phrase. "I tell you, Steve, you can't!"
He threw himself in front of the prosecutor, who was spending his time leafing through the typed pages of his speech.
"Put that down, Steve. Look, that mob has been organized by the Fundies. You won't get a hearing. You'll be stoned more likely. Why do you have to make a speech before an audience? What's wrong with a recording, a visual recording?"
"You want me to win the election, don't you?" asked Byerley, mildly.
"Win the election! You're not going to win, Steve. I'm trying to save your life."
"Oh, I'm not in danger."
"He's not in danger. He's not in danger." Lenton made a queer, rasping sound in his throat. "You mean you're getting out on that balcony in front of fifty thousand crazy crackpots and try to talk sense to them - on a balcony like a medieval dictator?"
Byerley consulted his watch. "In about five minutes - as soon as the televison lines are free."
Lenton's answering remark was not quite transliterable.

The crowd filled a roped off area of the city. Trees and houses seemed to grow out of a mass-human foundation. And by ultra-wave, the rest of the world watched. It was a purely local election, but it had a world audience just the same. Byerley thought of that and smiled.
But there was nothing to smile at in the crowd itself. There were banners and streamers, ringing every possible change on his supposed robotcy. The hostile attitude rose thickly and tangibly into the atmosphere.
From the start the speech was not successful. It competed against the inchoate mob howl and the rhythmic cries of the Fundie claques that formed mob-islands within the mob. Byerley spoke on, slowly, unemotionally-
Inside, Lenton clutched his hair and groaned - and waited for the blood.

There was a writhing in the front ranks. An angular citizen with popping eyes, and clothes too short for the lank length of his limbs, was pulling to the fore. A policeman dived after him, making slow, struggling passage. Byerley waved the latter off, angrily.
The thin man was directly under the balcony. His words tore unheard against the roar.
Byerley leaned forward. "What do you say? If you have a legitimate question, I'll answer it." He turned to a flanking guard. "Bring that man up here."
There was a tensing in the crowd. Cries of "Quiet" started in various parts of the mob, and rose to a bedlam, then toned down raggedly. The thin man, red-faced and panting, faced Byerley.
Byerley said, "Have you a question?"
The thin man stared, and said in a cracked voice, "Hit me!"
With sudden energy, he thrust out his chin at an angle. "Hit me! You say you're not a robot. Prove it. You can't hit a human, you monster."
There was a queer, flat, dead silence. Byerley's voice punctured it. "I have no reason to hit you."
The thin man was laughing wildly. "You can't hit me. You won't hit me. You're not a human. You're a monster, a make-believe man."
And Stephen Byerley, tight-lipped, in the face of thousands who watched in person and the millions who watched by screen, drew back his fist and caught the man crackingly upon the chin. The challenger went over backwards in sudden collapse, with nothing on his face but blank, blank surprise.
Byerley said, "I'm sorry. Take him in and see that he's comfortable. I want to speak to him when I'm through."
And when Dr. Calvin, from her reserved space, turned her automobile and drove off, only one reporter had recovered sufficiently from the shock to race after her, and shout an unheard question.
Susan Calvin called over her shoulder, "He's human."
That was enough. The reporter raced away in his own direction.
The rest of the speech might be described as "Spoken but not heard."

Dr. Calvin and Stephen Byerley met once again - a week before he took the oath of office as mayor. It was late-past midnight.
Dr. Calvin said, "You don't look tired."
The mayor-elect smiled. "I may stay up for a while. Don't tell Quinn."
"I shan't. But that was an interesting story of Quinn's, since you mention him. It's a shame to have spoiled it. I suppose you knew his theory?"
"Parts of it."
"It was highly dramatic. Stephen Byerley was a young lawyer, a powerful speaker, a great idealist - and with a certain flair for biophysics. Are you interested in robotics, Mr. Byerley?"
"Only in the legal aspects."
"This Stephen Byerley was. But there was an accident. Byerley's wife died; he himself, worse. His legs were gone; his face was gone; his voice was gone. Part of his mind was bent. He would not submit to plastic surgery. He retired from the world, legal career gone - only his intelligence, and his hands. left. Somehow he could obtain positronic brains, even a complex one, one which had the greatest capacity of forming judgments in ethical problems - which is the highest robotic function so far developed.
"He grew a body about it. Trained it to be everything he would have been and was no longer. He sent it out into the world as Stephen Byerley, remaining behind himself as the old, crippled teacher that no one ever saw-"
"Unfortunately," said the mayor-elect, "I ruined all that by hitting a man. The papers say it was your official verdict on the occasion that I was human."
"How did that happen? Do you mind telling me? It couldn't have been accidental."
"It wasn't entirely. Quinn did most of the work. My men started quietly spreading the fact that I had never hit a man; that I was unable to hit a man; that to fail to do so under provocation would be sure proof that I was a robot. So I arranged for a silly speech in public, with all sorts of publicity overtones, and almost inevitably, some fool fell for it. In its essence, it was what I call a shyster trick. One in which the artificial atmosphere which has been created does all the work. Of course, the emotional effects made my election certain, as intended."
The robopsychologist nodded. "I see you intrude on my field - as every politician must, I suppose. But I'm very sorry it turned out this way. I like robots. I like them considerably better than I do human beings. If a robot can be created capable of being a civil executive, I think he'd make the best one possible. By the Laws of Robotics, he'd be incapable of harming humans, incapable of tyranny, of corruption, of stupidity, of prejudice. And after he had served a decent term, he would leave, even though he were immortal, because it would be impossible for him to hurt humans by letting them know that a robot had ruled them. It would be most ideal."
"Except that a robot might fail due to the inherent inadequacies of his brain. The positronic brain has never equalled the complexities of the human brain."
"He would have advisers. Not even a human brain is capable of governing without assistance."
Byerley considered Susan Calvin with grave interest. "Why do you smile, Dr. Calvin?"
"I smile because Mr. Quinn didn't think of everything."
"You mean there could be more to that story of his."
"Only a little. For the three months before election, this Stephen Byerley that Mr. Quinn spoke about, this broken man, was in the country for some mysterious reason. He returned in time for that famous speech of yours. And after all, what the old cripple did once, he could do a second time, particularly where the second job is very simple in comparison to the first."
"I don't quite understand."
Dr. Calvin rose and smoothed her dress. She was obviously ready to leave. "I mean there is one time when a robot may strike a human being without breaking the First Law. Just one time."
"And when is that?"
Dr. Calvin was at the door. She said quietly, "When the human to be struck is merely another robot."
She smiled broadly, her thin face glowing. "Good-by Mr. Byerley. I hope to vote for you five years from now - for co-ordinator."
Stephen Byerley chuckled. "I must reply that that is a somewhat farfetched idea."
The door closed behind her.

--
I stared at her with a sort of horror, "Is that true?"
"All of it," she said.
"And the great Byerley was simply a robot."
"Oh, there's no way of ever finding out. I think he was. But when he decided to die, he had himself atomized, so that there will never be any legal proof. Besides, what difference would it make?"
"Well-"
"You share a prejudice against robots which is quite unreasoning. He was a very good Mayor; five years later he did become Regional Co-ordinator. And when the Regions of Earth formed their Federation in 2044, he became the first World Co-ordinator. By that time it was the Machines that were running the world anyway."
"Yes, but-"
"No buts! The Machines are robots, and they are running the world. It was five years ago that I found out all the truth. It was 2052; Byerley was completing his second term as World Co-ordinator-"

---
The Evitable Conflict
---

THE CO-ORDINATOR, IN HIS PRIVATE STUDY, HAD that medieval curiosity, a fireplace. To be sure, the medieval man might not have recognized it as such, since it had no functional significance. The quiet, licking flame lay in an insulated recess behind clear quartz.
The logs were ignited at long distance through a trifling diversion of the energy beam that fed the public buildings of the city. The same button that controlled the ignition first dumped the ashes of the previous fire, and allowed for the entrance of fresh wood. -It was a thoroughly domesticated fireplace, you see.

But the fire itself was real. It was wired for sound, so that you could hear the crackle and, of course, you could watch it leap in the air stream that fed it.
The Co-ordinator's ruddy glass reflected, in miniature, the discreet gamboling of the flame, and, in even further miniature, it was reflected in each of his brooding pupils.
And in the frosty pupils of his guest, Dr. Susan Calvin of U. S. Robots & Mechanical Men Corporation.
The Co-ordinator said, "I did not ask you here entirely for social purposes, Susan."
"I did not think you did, Stephen," she replied.
"-And yet I don't quite know how to phrase my problem. On the one hand, it can be nothing at all. On the other, it can mean the end of humanity."
"I have come across so many problems, Stephen, that presented the same alternative. I think all problems do."
"Really? Then judge this- World Steel reports an overproduction of twenty thousand long tons. The Mexican Canal is two months behind schedule. The mercury mines at Almaden have experienced a production deficiency since last spring, while the Hydroponics plant at Tientsin has been laying men off. These items happen to come to mind at the moment. There is more of the same sort."
"Are these things serious? I'm not economist enough to trace the fearful consequences of such things."
"In themselves, they are not serious. Mining experts can be sent to Almaden, if the situation were to get worse. Hydroponics engineers can be used in Java or in Ceylon, if there are too many at Tientsin. Twenty thousand long tons of steel won't fill more than a few days of world demand, and the opening of the Mexican Canal two months later than the planned date is of little moment. It's the Machines that worry me; I've spoken to your Director of Research about them already."
"To Vincent Silver? -He hasn't mentioned anything about it to me."
"I asked him to speak to no one. Apparently, he hasn't."
"And what did he tell you?"
"Let me put that item in its proper place. I want to talk about the Machines first. And I want to talk about them to you, because you're the only one in the world who understands robots well enough to help me now. -May I grow philosophical?"
"For this evening, Stephen, you may talk how you please and of what you please, provided you tell me first what you intend to prove."
"That such small unbalances in the perfection of our system of supply and demand, as I have mentioned, may be the first step towards the final war."
"Hmp. Proceed."
Susan Calvin did not allow herself to relax, despite the designed comfort of the chair she sat in. Her cold, thin-lipped face and her flat, even voice were becoming accentuated with the years. And although Stephen Byerley was one man she could like and trust, she was almost seventy and the cultivated habits of a lifetime are not easily broken.
"Every period of human development, Susan," said the Co-ordinator, "has had its own particular type of human conflict - its own variety of problem that, apparently, could be settled only by force. And each time, frustratingly enough, force never really settled the problem. Instead, it persisted through a series of conflicts, then vanished of itself, -what's the expression,- ah, yes 'not with a bang, but a whimper,' as the economic and social environment changed. And then, new problems, and a new series of wars. -Apparently endlessly cyclic.
"Consider relatively modern times. There were the series of dynastic wars in the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries, when the most important question in Europe was whether the houses of Hapsburg or Valois-Bourbon were to rule the continent. It was one of those 'inevitable conflicts,' since Europe could obviously not exist half one and half the other.
"Except that it did, and no war ever wiped out the one and established the other, until the rise of a new social atmosphere in France in 1789 tumbled first the Bourbons and, eventually, the Hapsburgs down the dusty chute to history's incinerator.
"And in those same centuries there were the more barbarous religious wars, which revolved about the important question of whether Europe was to be Catholic or Protestant. Half and half she could not be. It was 'inevitable' that the sword decide. -Except that it didn't. In England, a new industrialism was growing, and on the continent, a new nationalism. Half and half Europe remains to this day and no one cares much.
"In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, there was a cycle of nationalist-imperialist wars, when the most important question in the world was which portions of Europe would control the economic resources and consuming capacity of which portions of non-Europe. All non-Europe obviously could not exist part English and part French and part German and so on. -Until the forces of nationalism spread sufficiently, so that non-Europe ended what all the wars could not, and decided it could exist quite comfortably all non European.
"And so we have a pattern-"
"Yes. Stephen, you make it plain," said Susan Calvin. "These are not very profound observations."
"No. -But then, it is the obvious which is so difficult to see most of the time. People say 'It's as plain as the nose on your face.' But how much of the nose on your face can you see, unless someone holds a mirror up to you? In the twentieth century, Susan, we started a new cycle of wars - what shall I call them? Ideological wars? The emotions of religion applied to economic systems, rather than to extra-natural ones? Again the wars were 'inevitable' and this time there were atomic weapons, so that mankind could no longer live through its torment to the inevitable wasting away of inevitability. -And positronic robots came.
"They came in time, and, with it and alongside it, interplanetary travel. -So that it no longer seemed so important whether the world was Adam Smith or Karl Marx. Neither made very much sense under the new circumstances. Both had to adapt and they ended in almost the same place."
"A deus ex machina, then, in a double sense," said Dr. Calvin, dryly.
The Co-ordinator smiled gently, "I have never heard you pun before, Susan, but you are correct. And yet there was another danger. The ending of every other problem had merely given birth to another. Our new world wide robot economy may develop its own problems, and for that reason we have the Machines. The Earth's economy is stable, and will remain stable, because it is based upon the decisions of calculating machines that have the good of humanity at heart through the overwhelming force of the First Law of Robotics."
Stephen Byerley continued, "And although the Machines are nothing but the vastest conglomeration of calculating circuits ever invented, they are still robots within the meaning of the First Law, and so our Earth wide economy is in accord with the best interests of Man. The population of Earth knows that there will be no unemployment, no over-production or shortages. Waste and famine are words in history books. And so the question of ownership of the means of production becomes obsolescent. Whoever owned them (if such a phrase has meaning), a man, a group, a nation, or all mankind, they could be utilized only as the Machines directed. -Not because men were forced to but because it was the wisest course and men knew it.
"It puts an end to war - not only to the last cycle of wars, but to the next and to all of them. Unless-"
A long pause, and Dr. Calvin encouraged him by repetition. "Unless-"
The fire crouched and skittered along a log, then popped up.
"Unless," said the Co-ordinator, "the Machines don't fulfill their function."
"I see. And that is where those trifling maladjustments come in which you mentioned awhile ago - steel, hydroponics and so on."
"Exactly. Those errors should not be. Dr. Silver tells me they cannot be."
"Does he deny the facts? How unusual!"
"No, he admits the facts, of course. I do him an injustice. What he denies is that any error in the machine is responsible for the so-called (his phrase) errors in the answers. He
claims that the Machines are self correcting and that it would violate the fundamental laws of nature for an error to exist in the circuits of relays. And so I said -"
"And you said, 'Have your boys check them and make sure, anyway.'"
"Susan, you read my mind. It was what I said, and he said he couldn't."
"Too busy?"
"No, he said that no human could. He was frank about it He told me, and I hope I understand him properly, that the Machines are a gigantic extrapolation. Thus- A team of mathematicians work several years calculating a positronic brain equipped to do certain similar acts of calculation. Using this brain they make further calculations to create a still more complicated brain, which they use again to make one still more complicated and so on. According to Silver, what we call the Machines are the result of ten such steps."
"Ye-es, that sounds familiar. Fortunately, I'm not a mathematician. Poor Vincent. He is a young man. The Directors before him, Alfred Lanning and Peter Bogert, are dead, and they had no such problems. Nor had I. Perhaps roboticists as a whole should now die, since we can no longer understand our own creations."
"Apparently not. The Machines are not super-brains in Sunday supplement sense, -although they are so pictured in the Sunday supplements. It is merely that in their own particular province of collecting and analyzing a nearly infinite number of data and relationships thereof, in nearly infinitesimal time, they have progressed beyond the possibility of detailed human control.
"And then I tried something else. I actually asked the Machine. In the strictest secrecy, we fed it the original data involved in the steel decision, its own answer, and the actual developments since, -the overproduction, that is,- and asked for an explanation of the discrepancy."
"Good, and what was its answer?"
"I can quote you that word for word: 'The matter admits of no explanation.' "
"And how did Vincent interpret that?"
"In two ways. Either we had not given the Machine enough data to allow a definite answer, which was unlikely. Dr. Silver admitted that. -Or else, it was impossible for the Machine to admit that it could give any answer to data which implied that it could harm a human being. This, naturally, is implied by the First Law. And then Dr. Silver recommended that I see you."
Susan Calvin looked very tired, "I'm old, Stephen. When Peter Bogert died, they wanted to make me Director of Research and I refused. I wasn't young then, either, and I did not wish the responsibility. They let young Silver have it and that satisfied me; but what good is it, if I am dragged into such messes.
"Stephen, let me state my position. My researches do indeed involve the interpretation of robot behavior in the light of the Three Laws of Robotics. Here, now, we have these incredible calculating machines. They are positronic robots and therefore obey the Laws of Robotics. But they lack personality; that is, their functions are extremely limited. Must be, since they are so specialized. Therefore, there is very little room for the interplay of the Laws, and my one method of attack is virtually useless. In short, I don't know that I can help you, Stephen."
The Co-ordinator laughed shortly, "Nevertheless, let me tell you the rest. Let me give you my theories, and perhaps you will then be able to tell me whether they are possible in the light of robopsychology."
"By all means. Go ahead."
"Well, since the Machines are giving the wrong answers, then, assuming that they cannot be in error, there is only one possibility. They are being given the wrong data! In other words, the trouble is human, and not robotic. So I took my recent planetary inspection tour-"
"From which you have just returned to New York."
"Yes. It was necessary, you see, since there are four Machines, one handling each of the Planetary Regions. And all four are yielding imperfect results."
"Oh, but that follows, Stephen. If any one of the Machines is imperfect, that will automatically reflect in the result of the other three, since each of the others will assume as part of the data on which they base their own decisions, the perfection of the imperfect fourth. With a false assumption, they will yield false answers."
"Uh-huh. So it seemed to me. Now, I have here the records of my interviews with each of the Regional Vice-Coordinators. Would you look through them with me? -Oh, and first, have you heard of the `Society for Humanity'?"
"Umm, yes. They are an outgrowth of the Fundamentalists who have kept U. S. Robots from ever employing positronic robots on the grounds of unfair labor competition and so on. The 'Society for Humanity' itself is anti-Machine, is it not?"
"Yes, yes, but- Well, you will see. Shall we begin? We'll start with the Eastern Region."
"As you say-"

The Eastern Region
a-Area: 7,500,000 square miles
b-Population: 1,700,000,000
c-Capital: Shanghai

Ching Hso-lin's great-grandfather had been killed in the Japanese invasion of the old Chinese Republic, and there had been no one beside his dutiful children to mourn his loss or even to know he was lost. Ching Hso-lin's grandfather had survived the civil war of the late forties, but there had been no one beside his dutiful children to know or care of that.
And yet Ching Hso-lin was a Regional Vice-Co-ordinator, with the economic welfare of half the people of Earth in his care.
Perhaps it was with the thought of all that in mind, that Ching had two maps as the only ornaments on the wall of his office. One was an old hand-drawn affair tracing out an acre or two of land, and marked with the now outmoded pictographs of old China. A little creek trickled aslant the faded markings and there were the delicate pictorial indications of lowly huts, in one of which Ching's grandfather had been born.
The other map was a huge one, sharply delineated, with all markings in neat Cyrillic characters. The red boundary that marked the Eastern Region swept within its grand confines all that had once been China, India, Burma, Indo-China, and Indonesia. On it, within the old province of Szechuan, so light and gentle that none could see it, was the little mark placed there by Ching which indicated the location of his ancestral farm.
Ching stood before these maps as he spoke to Stephen Byerley in precise English, "No one knows better than you, Mr. Co-ordinator, that my job, to a large extent, is a sinecure. It carries with it a certain social standing, and I represent a convenient focal point for administration, but otherwise it is the Machine! -The Machine does all the work. What did you think, for instance, of the Tientsin Hydroponics works?"
"Tremendous!" said Byerley.
"It is but one of dozens, and not the largest. Shanghai, Calcutta, Batavia, Bangkok- They are widely spread and they are the answer to feeding the billion and three quarters of the East."
"And yet," said Byerley, "you have an unemployment problem there at Tientsin. Can you be over-producing? It is incongruous to think of Asia as suffering from too much food."
Ching's dark eyes crinkled at the edges. "No. It has not come to that yet. It is true that over the last few months, several vats at Tientsin have been shut down, but it is nothing serious. The men have been released only temporarily and those who do not care to work in other fields have been shipped to Colombo in Ceylon, where a new plant is being put into operation."
"But why should the vats be closed down?"
Ching smiled gently, "You do not know much of hydroponics, I see. Well, that is not surprising. You are a Northerner, and there soil farming is still profitable. It is fashionable in the North to think of hydroponics, when it is thought of at all, as a device of growing turnips in a chemical solution, and so it is - in an infinitely complicated way.
"In the first place, by far the largest crop we deal with (and the percentage is growing) is yeast. We have upward of two thousand strains of yeast in production and new strains are added monthly. The basic food-chemicals of the various yeasts are nitrates and phosphates among the inorganics together with proper amounts of the trace metals needed, down to the fractional parts per million of boron and molybdenum which are required. The organic matter is mostly sugar mixtures derived from the hydrolysis of cellulose, but, in addition, there are various food factors which must be added.
"For a successful hydroponics industry - one which can feed seventeen hundred million people - we must engage in an immense reforestation program throughout the East; we must have huge wood-conversion plants to deal with our southern jungles; we must have power, and steel, and chemical synthetics above all."
"Why the last, sir?"
"Because, Mr. Byerley, these strains of yeast have each their peculiar properties. We have developed, as I said, two thousand strains. The beef steak you thought you ate today was yeast. The frozen fruit confection you had for dessert was iced yeast. We have filtered yeast juice with the taste, appearance, and all the food value of milk.
"It is flavor, more than anything else, you see, that makes yeast feeding popular and for the sake of flavor we have developed artificial, domesticated strains that can no longer support themselves on a basic diet of salts and sugar. One needs biotin; another needs pteroylglutamic acid; still others need seventeen different amino acids supplied them as well as all the Vitamins B, but one (and yet it is popular and we cannot, with economic sense, abandon it)-"
Byerley stirred in his seat, "To what purpose do you tell me all this?"
"You asked me, sir, why men are out of work in Tientsin. I have a little more to explain. It is not only that we must have these various and varying foods for our yeast; but there remains the complicating factor of popular fads with passing time; and of the possibility of the development of new strains with the new requirements and new popularity. All this must be foreseen, and the Machine does the job-'
"But not perfectly."
"Not very imperfectly, in view of the complications I have mentioned. Well, then, a few thousand workers in Tientsin are temporarily out of a job. But, consider this, the amount of waste in this past year (waste that is, in terms of either defective supply or defective demand) amounts to not one-tenth of one percent of our total productive turnover. I consider that-"
"Yet in the first years of the Machine, the figure was nearer onethousandth of one percent."
"Ah, but in the decade since the Machine began its operations in real earnest, we have made use of it to increase our old pre-Machine yeast industry twenty-fold. You expect imperfections to increase with complications, though-"
"Though?"
"There was the curious instance of Rama Vrasayana."
"What happened to him?"
"Vrasayana was in charge of a brine-evaporation plant for the production of iodine, with which yeast can do without, but human beings not. His plant was forced into receivership."
"Really? And through what agency?"
"Competition, believe it or not. In general, one of the chiefest functions of the Machine's analyses is to indicate the most efficient distribution of our producing units. It is obviously faulty to have areas insufficiently serviced, so that the transportation costs account for too great a percentage of the overhead. Similarly, it is faulty to have an area too well serviced, so that factories must be run at lowered capacities, or else compete harmfully with one another. In the case of Vrasayana, another plant was established in the same city, and with a more efficient extracting system."
"The Machine permitted it?"
"Oh, certainly. That is not surprising. The new system is becoming widespread. The surprise is that the Machine failed to warn Vrasayana to renovate or combine. -Still, no matter. Vrasayana accepted a job as engineer in the new plant, and if his responsibility and pay are now less, he is not actually suffering. The workers found employment easily; the old plant has been converted to - something or other. Something useful. We left it all to the Machine."
"And otherwise you have no complaints."
"None!"

The Tropic Region:
a-Area: 22,000,000 square miles
b-Population: 500,000,000
c-Capital: Capital City
The map in Lincoln Ngoma's office was far from the model of neat precision of the one in Ching's Shanghai dominion. The boundaries of Ngoma's Tropic Region were stencilled in dark, wide brown and swept about a gorgeous interior labelled "jungle" and "desert" and "here be Elephants and all Manner of Strange Beasts."
It had much to sweep, for in land area the Tropic Region enclosed most of two continents: all of South America north of Argentina and all of Africa south of the Atlas. It included North America south of the Rio Grande as well, and even Arabia and Iran in Asia. It was the reverse of the Eastern Region. Where the ant hives of the Orient crowded half of humanity into 15 per cent of the land mass, the Tropics stretched its 15 per cent of Humanity over nearly half of all the land in the world.
But it was growing. It was the one Region whose population increase through immigration exceeded that through births. -And for all who came it had use.
To Ngoma, Stephen Byerley seemed like one of these immigrants, a pale searcher for the creative work of carving a harsh environment into the softness necessary for man, and he felt some of that automatic contempt of the strong man born to the strong Tropics for the unfortunate pallards of the colder suns.
The Tropics had the newest capital city on Earth, and it was called simply that: "Capital City," in the sublime confidence of youth. It spread brightly over the fertile uplands of Nigeria and outside Ngoma's windows, far below, was life and color; the bright, bright sun and the quick, drenching showers. Even the squawking of the rainbowed birds was brisk and the stars were hard pinpoints in the sharp night.
Ngoma laughed. He was a big, dark man, strong faced and handsome.
"Sure," he said, and his English was colloquial and mouthfilling, "the Mexican Canal is overdue. What the hell? It will get finished just the same, old boy."
"It was doing well up to the last half year."
Ngoma looked at Byerley and slowly crunched his teeth over the end of a big cigar, spitting out one end and lighting the other, "Is this an official investigation, Byerley? What's going on?"
"Nothing. Nothing at all. It's just my function as Coordinator to be curious."
"Well, if it's just that you are filling in a dull moment, the truth is that we're always short on labor. There's lots going on in the Tropics. The Canal is only one of them-"
"But doesn't your Machine predict the amount of labor available for the Canal, -allowing for all the competing projects?"
Ngoma placed one hand behind his neck and blew smoke rings at the ceiling, "It was a little off."
"Is it often a little off?"
"Not oftener than you would expect. -We don't expect too much of it, Byerley. We feed it data. We take its results. We do what it says. -But it's just a convenience; just a labor-saving device. We could do without it, if we had to. Maybe not as well. Maybe not as quickly. But we'd get there.
"We've got confidence out here, Byerley, and that's the secret. Confidence! We've got new land that's been waiting for us for thousands of years, while the rest of the world was being ripped apart in the lousy fumblings of pre-atomic time. We don't have to eat yeast like the Eastern boys, and we don't have to worry about the stale dregs of the last century like you Northerners.
"We've wiped out the tsetse fly and the Anopheles mosquito, and people find they can live in the sun and like it, now. We've thinned down the jungles and found soil; we've watered the deserts and found gardens. We've got coal and oil in untouched fields, and minerals out of count.
"Just step back. That's all we ask the rest of the world to do. -Step back, and let us work."
Byerley said, prosaically, "But the Canal, - it was on schedule six months ago. What happened?"
Ngoma spread his hands, "Labor troubles." He felt through a pile of papers skeltered about his desk and gave it up.
"Had something on the matter here," he muttered, "but never mind. There was a work shortage somewhere in Mexico once on the question of women. There weren't enough women in the neighborhood. It seemed no one had thought of feeding sexual data to the Machine."
He stopped to laugh, delightedly, then sobered, "Wait a while. I think I've got it. -Villafranca!"
"Villafranca?"
"Francisco Villafranca. -He was the engineer in charge. Now let me straighten it out. Something happened and there was a cave-in. Right. Right. That was it. Nobody died, as I remember, but it made a hell of a mess. -Quite a scandal."
"Oh?"
"There was some mistake in his calculations. -Or at least, the Machine said so. They fed through Villafranca's data, assumptions, and so on. The stuff he had started with. The answers came out differently. It seems the answers Villafranca had used didn't take account of the effect of a heavy rainfall on the contours of the cut. -Or something like that. I'm not an engineer, you understand.
"Anyway, Villafranca put up a devil of a squawk. He claimed the Machine's answer had been different the first time. That he had followed the Machine faithfully. Then he quit! We offered to hold him on - reasonable doubt, previous work satisfactory, and all that - in a subordinate position, of course - had to do that much - mistakes can't go unnoticed - bad for discipline- Where was I?"
"You offered to hold him on."
"Oh yes. He refused. -Well, take all in all, we're two months behind. Hell, that's nothing."
Byerley stretched out his hand and let the fingers tap lightly on the desk, "Villafranca blamed the Machine, did he?"
"Well, he wasn't going to blame himself, was he? Let's face it; human nature is an old friend of ours. Besides, I remember something else now- Why the hell can't I find documents when I want them? My filing system isn't worth a damn- This Villafranca was a member of one of your Northern organizations. Mexico is too close to the North! that's part of the trouble."
"Which organization are you speaking of?'
"The Society of Humanity, they call it. He used to attend the annual conference in New York, Villafranca did. Bunch of crackpots, but harmless. -They don't like the Machines; claim they're destroying human initiative. So naturally Villafranca would blame the Machine. -Don't understand that group myself. Does Capital City look as if the human race were running out of initiative?" 
And Capital City stretched out in golden glory under a golden sun,-the newest and youngest creation of Homo metropolis.

The European Region
a-Area: 4,000,000 square miles
b-Population: 300,000,000
c-Capital: Geneva

The European Region was an anomaly in several ways. In area, it was far the smallest; not one fifth the size of the Tropic Region in area, and not one fifth the size of the Eastern Region in population. Geographically, it was only somewhat similar to pre-Atomic Europe, since it excluded what had once been European Russia and what had once been the British Isles, while it included the Mediterranean coasts of Africa and Asia, and, in a queer jump across the Atlantic, Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay as well.
Nor was it likely to improve its relative status vis-a-vis the other regions of Earth, except for what vigor the South American provinces lent it. Of all the Regions, it alone showed a positive population decline over the past half century. It alone had not seriously expanded its productive facilities, or offered anything radically new to human culture.
"Europe," said Madame Szegeczowska, in her soft French, "is essentially an economic appendage of the Northern Region. We know it, and it doesn't matter."
And as though in resigned acceptance of a lack of individuality, there was no map of Europe on the wall of the Madame Co-ordinator's office.
"And yet," pointed out Byerley, "you have a Machine of your own, and you are certainly under no economic pressure from across the ocean."
"A Machine! Bah!" She shrugged her delicate shoulders, and allowed a thin smile to cross her little face as she tamped out a cigarette with long fingers. "Europe is a sleepy place. And such of our men as do not manage to emigrate to the Tropics are tired and sleepy along with it. You see for yourself that it is myself, a poor woman, to whom falls the task of being Vice-Co-ordinator. Well, fortunately, it is not a difficult job, and not much is expected of me.
"As for the Machine- What can it say but 'Do this and it will be best for you.' But what is best for us? Why, to be an economic appendage of the Northern Region.
"And is it so terrible? No wars! We live in peace - and it is pleasant after seven thousand years of war. We are old, monsieur. In our borders, we have the regions where Occidental civilization was cradled. We have Egypt and Mesopotamia; Crete and Syria; Asia Minor and Greece. -But old age is not necessarily an unhappy time. It can be a fruition-"
"Perhaps you are right," said Byerley, affably. "At least the tempo of life is not as intense as in the other Regions. It is a pleasant atmosphere."
"Is it not? -Tea is being brought, monsieur. If you will indicate your cream and sugar preference, please. Thank you.
She sipped gently, then continued, "It is pleasant. The rest of Earth is welcome to the continuing struggle. I find a parallel here; a very interesting one. There was a time when Rome was master of the world. It had adopted the culture and civilization of Greece; a Greece which had never been united, which had ruined itself with war, and which was ending in a state of decadent squalor. Rome united it, brought it peace and let it live a life of secure non-glory. It occupied itself with its philosophies and its art, far from the clash of growth and war. It was a sort of death, but it was restful, and it lasted with minor breaks for some four hundred years."
"And yet," said Byerley, "Rome fell eventually, and the opium dream was over."
"There are no longer barbarians to overthrow civilization."
"We can be our own barbarians. Madame Szegeczowska. -Oh, I meant to ask you. The Almaden mercury mines have fallen off quite badly in production. Surely the ores are not declining more rapidly than anticipated?"
The little woman's gray eyes fastened shrewdly on Byerley, "Barbarians - the fall of civilization - possible failure of the Machine. Your thought processes are very transparent, monsieur."
"Are they?" Byerley smiled. "I see that I should have had men to deal with as hitherto. -You consider the Almaden affair to be the fault of the Machine?"
"Not at all, but I think you do. You, yourself, are a native of the Northern Region. The Central Co-ordination Office is at New York. -And I have noticed for quite a while that you Northerners lack somewhat of faith in the Machine."
"We do?"
"There is your `Society for Humanity' which is strong in the North, but naturally fails to find many recruits in tired, old Europe, which is quite willing to let feeble Humanity alone for a while. Surely, you are one of the confident North and not one of the cynical old continent."
"This has a connection with Almaden?"
"Oh, yes, I think so. The mines are in the control of Consolidated Cinnabar, which is certainly a Northern company, with headquarters at Nikolaev. Personally, I wonder if the Board of Directors have been consulting the Machine at all. They said they had in our conference last month, and, of course, we have no evidence that they did not, but I wouldn't take the word of a Northerner in this matter - no offense intended - under any circumstances. -Nevertheless, I think it will have a fortunate ending."
"In what way, my dear madam?"
"You must understand that the economic irregularities of the last few months, which, although small as compared with the great storms of the past, are quite disturbing to our peace-drenched spirits, have caused considerable restiveness in the Spanish province. I understand that Consolidated Cinnabar is selling out to a group of native Spaniards. It is consoling. If we are economic vassals of the North, it is humiliating to have the fact advertised too blatantly. -And our people can be better trusted to follow the Machine."
"Then you think there will be no more trouble?"
"I am sure there will not be- In Almaden, at least."

The Northern Region
a-Area: 18,000,000 square miles
b-Population: 800,000,000
c--Capital: Ottawa

The Northern Region, in more ways than one, was at the top. This was exemplified quite well by the map in the Ottawa office of Vice-Co-ordinator Hiram Mackenzie, in which the North Pole was centered. Except for the enclave of Europe with its Scandinavian and Icelandic regions, all the Arctic area was within the Northern Region.
Roughly, it could be divided into two major areas. To the left on the map was all of North America above the Rio Grande. To the right was included all of what had once been the Soviet Union. Together these areas represented the centered power of the planet in the first years of the Atomic Age. Between the two was Great Britain, a tongue of the Region licking at Europe. Up at the top of the map, distorted into odd, huge shapes, were Australia and New Zealand, also member provinces of the Region.
Not all the changes of the past decades had yet altered the fact that the North was the economic ruler of the planet.
There was almost an ostentatious symbolism thereof in the fact that of the official Regional maps Byerley had seen, Mackenzie's alone showed all the Earth, as though the North feared no competition and needed no favoritism to point up its pre-eminence.
"Impossible," said Mackenzie, dourly, over the whiskey. "Mr. Byerley, you have had no training as a robot technician, I believe."
"No, I have not."
"Hmp. Well, it is, in my opinion, a sad thing that Ching, Ngoma and Szegeczowska haven't either. There is too preva lent an opinion among the peoples of Earth that a Co-ordinator need only be a capable organizer, a broad generalizer, and an amiable person. These days he should know his robotics as well, no offense intended."
"None taken. I agree with you."
"I take it, for instance, from what you have said already, that you worry about the recent trifling dislocation in world economy. I don't know what you suspect, but it has happened in the past that people - who should have known better - wondered what would happen if false data were fed into the Machine."
"And what would happen, Mr. Mackenzie?"
"Well," the Scotsman shifted his weight and sighed, "all collected data goes through a complicated screening system which involves both human and mechanical checking, so that the problem is not likely to arise. -But let us ignore that. Humans are fallible, also corruptible, and ordinary mechanical devices are liable to mechanical failure.
"The real point of the matter is that what we call a `wrong datum' is one which is inconsistent with all other known data. It is our only criterion of right and wrong. It is the Machine's as well. Order it for instance, to direct agricultural activity on the basis of an average July temperature in Iowa of 57 degrees Fahrenheit. It won't accept that. It will not give an answer. -Not that it has any prejudice against that particular temperature, or that an answer is impossible; but because, in the light of all the other data fed it over a period of years, it knows that the probability of an average July temperature of 57 is virtually nil. It rejects that datum.
"The only way a `wrong datum' can be forced on the Machine is to include it as part of a self-consistent whole, all of which is subtly wrong in a manner either too delicate for the Machine to detect or outside the Machine's experience. The former is beyond human capacity, and the latter is almost so, and is becoming more nearly so as the Machine's experience increases by the second."
Stephen Byerley placed two fingers to the bridge of his nose, "Then the Machine cannot be tampered with- And how do you account for recent errors, then?"
"My dear Byerley, I see that you instinctively follow that great error - that the Machine knows all. Let me cite you a case from my personal experience. The cotton industry engages experienced buyers who purchase cotton. Their procedure is to pull a tuft of cotton out of a random bale of a lot. They will look at that tuft and feel it, tease it out, listen to the crackling perhaps as they do so, touch it with their tongue,and through this procedure they will determine the class of cotton the bales represent. There are about a dozen such classes. As a result of their decisions, purchases are made at certain prices, blends are made in certain proportions. -Now these buyers cannot yet be replaced by the Machine."
"Why not? Surely the data involved is not too complicated for it?"
"Probably not. But what data is this you refer to? No textile chemist knows exactly what it is that the buyer tests when he feels a tuft of cotton. Presumably there's the average length of the threads, their feel, the extent and nature of their slickness, the way they hang together, and so on. -Several dozen items, subconsciously weighed, out of years of experience. But the quantitative nature of these tests is not known; maybe even the very nature of some of them is not known. So we have nothing to feed the Machine. Nor can the buyers explain their own judgment. They can only say, `Well, look at it. Can't you tell it's class-such-and-such?' "
"I see."
"There are innumerable cases like that. The Machine is only a tool after all, which can help humanity progress faster by taking some of the burdens of calculations and interpretations off its back. The task of the human brain remains what it has always been; that of discovering new data to be analyzed, and of devising new concepts to be tested. A pity the Society for Humanity won't understand that."
"They are against the Machine?"
"They would be against mathematics or against the art of writing if they had lived at the appropriate time. These reactionaries of the Society claim the Machine robs man of his soul. I notice that capable men are still at a premium in our society; we still need the man who is intelligent enough to think of the proper questions to ask. Perhaps if we could find enough of such, these dislocations you worry about, Coordinator, wouldn't occur."

Earth (Including the uninhabited continent, Antarctica)
a-Area: 54,000,000 square miles (land surface)
b-Population: 3,300,000,000
c-Capital: New York

The fire behind the quartz was weary now, and sputtered its reluctant way to death.
The Co-ordinator was somber, his mood matching the sinking flame.
"They all minimize the state of affairs." His voice was low. "Is it not easy to imagine that they all laugh at me? And yet Vincent Silver said the Machines cannot be out of order, and I must believe him. Hiram Mackenzie says they cannot be fed false data, and I must believe him. But the Machines are going wrong, somehow, and I must believe that, too; and so there is still an alternative left."
He glanced sidewise at Susan Calvin, who, with closed eyes, for a moment seemed asleep.
"What is that?" she asked, prompt to her cue, nevertheless.
"Why, that correct data is indeed given, and correct answers are indeed received, but that they are then ignored. There is no way the Machine can enforce obedience to its dictates."
"Madame Szegeczowska hinted as much, with reference to Northerners in general, it seems to me."
"So she did."
"And what purpose is served by disobeying the Machine? Let's consider motivations."
"It's obvious to me, and should be to you. It is a matter of rocking the boat, deliberately. There can be no serious conflicts on Earth, in which one group or another can seize more power than it has for what it thinks is its own good despite the harm to Mankind as a whole, while the Machines rule. If popular faith in the Machines can be destroyed to the point where they are abandoned, it will be the law of the jungle again. -And not one of the four Regions can be freed of the suspicion of wanting just that.
"The East has half of humanity within its borders, and the Tropics more than half of Earth's resources. Each can feel itself the natural rulers of all Earth, and each has a history of humiliation by the North, for which it can be human enough to wish a senseless revenge. Europe has a tradition of greatness, on the other hand. It once did rule the Earth, and there is nothing so eternally adhesive as the memory of power.
"Yet, in another way, it's hard to believe. Both the East and the Tropics are in a state of enormous expansion within their own borders. Both are climbing incredibly. They cannot have the spare energy for military adventures. And Europe can have nothing but its dreams. It is a cipher, militarily."
"So, Stephen," said Susan, "you leave the North."
"Yes," said Byerley, energetically, "I do. The North is now the strongest, and has been for nearly a century, or its component parts have been. But it is losing relatively, now. The Tropic Regions may take their place in the forefront of civilization for the first time since the Pharaohs, and there are Northerners who fear that.
`"The 'Society for Humanity' is a Northern organization, primarily, you know, and they make no secret of not wanting the Machines. -Susan, they are few in numbers, but it is an association of powerful men. Heads of factories; directors of industries and agricultural combines who hate to be what they call 'the Machine's office-boy' belong to it. Men with ambition belong to it. Men who feel themselves strong enough to decide for themselves what is best for themselves, and not just to be told what is best for others.
"In short, just those men who, by together refusing to accept the decisions of the Machine, can, in a short time, turn the world topsy-turvy; just those belong to the Society.
"Susan, it hangs together. Five of the Directors of World Steel are members, and World Steel suffers from overproduction. Consolidated Cinnabar, which mined mercury at AImaden, was a Northern concern. Its books are still being investigated, but one, at least, of the men concerned was a member. Francisco Villafranca, who, singlehanded, delayed the Mexican Canal for two months, was a member, we know already - and so was Rama Vrasayana, I was not at all surprised to find out."
Susan said, quietly, "These men, I might point out, have all done badly-"
"But naturally," interjected Byerley. "To disobey the Machine's analyses is to follow a non-optimal path. Results are poorer than they might be. It's the price they pay. They will have it rough now but in the confusion that will eventually follow-"
"Just what do you plan doing, Stephen?"
"There is obviously no time to lose. I am going to have the Society outlawed, every member removed from any responsible post. And all executive and technical positions, henceforward, can be filled only by applicants signing a non-Society oath. It will mean a certain surrender of basic civil liberties, but I am sure the Congress-"
"It won't work!"
"What!- Why not?"
"I will make a prediction. If you try any such thing, you will find yourself hampered at every turn. You will find it impossible to carry out. You will find your every move in that direction will result in trouble."
Byerley was taken aback, "Why do you say that? I was rather hoping for your approval in this matter."
"You can't have it as long as your actions are based on a false premise. You admit the Machine can't be wrong, and can't be fed wrong data. I will now show you that it cannot be disobeyed, either, as you think is being done by the Society."
"That I don't see at all."
"Then listen. Every action by any executive which does not follow the exact directions of the Machine he is working with becomes part of the data for the next problem. The Machine, therefore, knows that the executive has a certain tendency to disobey. He can incorporate that tendency into that data, -even quantitatively, that is, judging exactly how much and in what direction disobedience would occur. Its next answers would be just sufficiently biased so that after the executive concerned disobeyed, he would have automatically corrected those answers to optimal directions. The Machine knows, Stephen!"
"You can't be sure of all this. You are guessing."
"It is a guess based on a lifetime's experience with robots. You had better rely on such a guess, Stephen."
"But then what is left? The Machines themselves are correct and the premises they work on are correct. That we have agreed upon. Now you say that it cannot be disobeyed. Then what is wrong?"
"You have answered yourself. Nothing is wrong! Think about the Machines for a while, Stephen. They are robots, and they follow the First Law. But the Machines work not for any single human being, but for all humanity, so that the First Law becomes: 'No Machine may harm humanity; or, through inaction, allow humanity to come to harm.'
"Very well, then, Stephen, what harms humanity? Economic dislocations most of all, from whatever cause. Wouldn't you say so?"
"I would."
"And what is most likely in the future to cause economic dislocations? Answer that, Stephen."
"I should say," replied Byerley, unwillingly, "the destruction of the Machines."
"And so should I say, and so should the Machines say. Their first care, therefore, is to preserve themselves, for us. And so they are quietly taking care of the only elements left that threaten them. It is not the 'Society for Humanity' which is shaking the boat so that the Machines may be destroyed. You have been looking at the reverse of the picture. Say rather that the Machine is shaking the boat very slightly - just enough to shake loose those few which cling to the side for purposes the Machines consider harmful to Humanity.
"So Vrasayana loses his factory and gets another job where he can do no harm - he is not badly hurt, he is not rendered incapable of earning a living, for the Machine cannot harm a human being more than minimally, and that only to save a greater number. Consolidated Cinnabar loses control at Almaden. Villafranca is no longer a civil engineer in charge of an important project. And the directors of World Steel are losing their grip on the industry -or will."
"But you don't really know all this," insisted Byerley, distractedly."How can we possibly take a chance on your being right?"
"You must. Do you remember the Machine's own statement when you presented the problem to him? It was: 'The matter admits of no explanation.' The Machine did not say there was no explanation, or that it could determine no explanation. It simply was not going to admit any explanation. In other words, it would be harmful to humanity to have the explanation known, and that's why we can only guess - and keep on guessing."
"But how can the explanation do us harm? Assume that you are right, Susan."
"Why, Stephen, if I am right, it means that the Machine is conducting our future for us not only simply in direct answer to our direct questions, but in general answer to the world situation and to human psychology as a whole. And to know that may make us unhappy and may hurt our pride. The Machine cannot, must not, make us unhappy.
"Stephen, how do we know what the ultimate good of Humanity will entail? We haven't at our disposal the infinite factors that the Machine has at its! Perhaps, to give you a not unfamiliar example, our entire technical civilization has created more unhappiness and misery than it has removed. Perhaps an agrarian or pastoral civilization, with less culture and less people would be better. If so, the Machines must move in that direction, preferably without telling us, since in our ignorant prejudices we only know that what we are used to, is good - and we would then fight change. Or perhaps a complete urbanization, or a completely caste-ridden society, or complete anarchy, is the answer. We don't know. Only the Machines know, and they are going there and taking us with them."
"But you are telling me, Susan, that the 'Society for Humanity' is right; and that Mankind has lost its own say in its future."
"It never had any, really. It was always at the mercy of economic and sociological forces it did not understand - at the whims of climate, and the fortunes of war. Now the Machines understand them; and no one can stop them, since the Machines will deal with them as they are dealing with the Society, - having, as they do, the greatest of weapons at their disposal, the absolute control of our economy."
"How horrible!"
"Perhaps how wonderful! Think, that for all time, all conflicts are finally evitable. Only the Machines, from now on, are inevitable!"
And the fire behind the quartz went out and only a curl of smoke was left to indicate its place.
--

"And that is all," said Dr. Calvin, rising. "I saw it from the beginning, when the poor robots couldn't speak, to the end, when they stand between mankind and destruction. I will see no more. My life is over. You will see what comes next."
I never saw Susan Calvin again. She died last month at the age of eighty-two.
Vehicles
Experiments in Synthetic Psychology
Valentino Braitenberg
The MIT Press Cambridge, Massachusetts London, England
Introduction
Let the Problem of the Mind Dissolve in Your Mind
This is an exercise in fictional science, or science fiction, if you like that better. Not for amusement: science fiction in the      vice of science. Or just science, if you agree that fiction is part of it, always was, and always will be as long as our brains are only minuscule fragments of the universe, much too small to hold all the facts of the world but not too idle to speculate about them.
I have been dealing for many years with certain structures within animal brains that seemed to be interpretable as pieces of comput- ing machinery because of their simplicity and/or regularity. Much of this work is only interesting if you are yourself involved in it. At times, though, in the back of my mind, while I was counting fibers in the visual ganglia of the fly or synapses in the cerebral cortex of the mouse, I felt knots untie, distinctions dissolve, difficulties disap- pear, difficulties I had experienced much earlier when I still held my first naive philosophical approach to the problem of the mind. This process of purification has been, over the years, a delightful experi- ence. The text I want you to read is designed to convey some of this
2. I VEHICLES
to you, if you are prepared to follow me not through a world ofreal brains but through a toy world that we will create together.
We will talk only about machines with very simple internal struc- .tures, too simple in fact to be interesting from the point of view of mechanical or electrical engineering. Interest arises, rather, when we look at these machines or vehicles as if they were animals in a naniral environment. We will be tempted, then, to use psychologi- cal language in describing their behavior. And yet we know very
well that there is nothing in these vehicles that we have not put in ourselves. This will be an interesting educational game.
Our vehicles may move in water by jet propulsion. Or you may prefer to imagine them moving somewhere between galaxies, with negligible gravitational pull. Remember, however, that their jets must expel matter in order to function at all, and this implies re- plenishment of the food stores within the vehicles, which might be a
problem between galaxies. This suggests vehicles moving on the surface of the earth through an agricultural landscape where they have good support and can easily find the food or fuel they need. (Indeed the first few chapters here conjure up images of vehicles swimming around in the water, while later what comes to mind are little carts moving on hard surfaces. This is no accident, if the
evolution of vehicles 1 to 14 in any way reflects the evolution of
animal species.)
It does not matter. Get used to a way of thinking in which the
hardware of the realization of an idea is much less important than the idea itself. Norbert Wiener was emphatic about this when he formulated the title of his famous book: Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in Animals and Machines.
Vehicle 1
Getting Around
Vehicle 1 is equipped with one sensor and one motor (figure 1). The connection is a very simple one. The more there is of the quality to which the sensor is tuned, the faster the motor goes. Let the quality be temperature and let the force exerted by the motor be exactly proportionate to the absolute temperature (the temperature above zero degrees Kelvin) measured by the sensor. The vehicle will move, wherever it is (the absolute temperature is nowhere equal to zero), in the direction in which it happens to be pointing. It will slow down in cold regions and speed up where it is warm.
Here we have introduced a bit of Aristotelian physics. Aristotle, like everybody else between this ancient Greek philosopher and the less ancient Italian physicist Galileo, thought that the speed of a moving body is proportionate to the force that drives it. This is true in most instances, namely when there is friction to slow down the vehicle. Normally friction will see to it that the velocity becomes zero in the absence of any force, that it will stay at a certain small value for a certain small force, at a higher value for a higher force,
and so forth.
Of course, as you all know, this is not true for heavenly bodies
Figurer
Vehicle 1 , the simplest vehicle. The speed of the motor (rectangular box at
the tail end) is controlled by a sensor (half circle on a stalk, at the front
end). ·Motion is always forward, in the direction of the arrow, except for perturbations.
I
(especially if you don't invest astronomical time in observing them). Their velocity is a complicated result of all the forces that ever hit them. This is another reason for letting our vehicles move in       or on the surface of the earth rather than in outer space.
In this Aristotelian world our vehicle number 1 may even come to rest. This will happen when it enters a cold region where the force exerted by its motor, being proportionate to the temperature, becomes smaller than the frictional force.
Once you let friction come into the picture, other amazing things may happen. In outer space Vehicle r would move on a straight course with varying speed (the gravitational pull of neighboring galaxies averages out to nothing). Not so on earth. The friction, which is nothing but the sum of all the microscopic forces that arise in a situation too messy to be analyzed in detail, may not be quite symmetrical. As the vehicle pushes forward against frictional forces, it will deviate from its course. In the long run it will be seen to move in a complicated trajectory, curving one way or the other without apparent good reason. If it is very small, its motion will be quite erratic, similar to "Brownian motion," only with a certain drive added.
Imagine, now, what you would think if you saw such a vehicle swimming around in a pond. It is restless, you would say, and does not like warm water. But it is quite stupid, since it is not able to turn back to the nice cold spot it overshot in its restlessness. Anyway, you would say, it is ALIVE, since you have never seen a particle of dead matter move around quite like that.
5 I Getting Around
Vehicle 2
Fear and Aggression
Vehicle 2 is generally similar to Vehicle 1 except that it has two sensors, one on each side, and two motors, right and left (figure 2). You may think of it as being a descendant of Vehicle 1 through some incomplete process of biological reduplication: two of the earlier brand stuck together side by side. Again, the more the sensors are excited, the faster the motors run.
Of course you notice right away that we can make three kinds of such vehicles, depending on whether we connect (a) each sensor to the motor on the same side, (b) each sensor to the motor on the opposite side, or (c) both sensors to both motors. We can im- mediately dismiss case (c), for this is nothing but a somewhat more luxurious version of Vehicle 1 . The difference between (a) and (b), however, is very interesting.
Consider (a) first. This vehicle will spend more time in the places where there is less of the stuff that excites its sensors and will speed up when it is exposed to higher concentrations. If the source of the stuff (say, light in the case of light sensors) is directly ahead, the vehicle may hit the source unless it is deflected from its course. If the source is to one side (figure 3), one of the.sensors, the one nearer to the source, is excited more than the other. The corresponding
ac
Figure 2
Vehicle 2., with two motors and two sensors; otherwise like Vehicle 1 . The connections differ in a, b, and c.
a
b
' '
I I"_
/ I I \ ' ' ........ '
\
\'
\ \
motor will work harder. And as a consequence the vehicle will turn away from the source.
Now let us try the other scheme of sensory-motor              (b) in figure 3. No change if the source is straight ahead. If it is to one side, however, we notice a difference with respect to Vehicle 2a. Vehicle 2b will turn toward the source and eventually hit it. There is no escaping: as long as 2b stays in the vicinity of the source, no matter how it stumbles and hesitates, it will hit the source frontally in the end. Only in the unlikely case that a strong perturbation in its course makes it turn exactly away from the source, and no further perturbation occurs, can it escape its fate.
Let Vehicles 2a and 2b move around in their world for a while and watch them. Their characters are quite opposite. Both DISLIKE sources. But 2a becomes restless in their vicinity and tends to avoid them, escaping until it safely reaches a place where the influence of the source is scarcely felt. Vehicle 2a is a COWARD, you would say. Not so Vehicle 2b. It, too, is excited by the presence of sources, but resolutely turns toward them and hits them with high velocity, as if it wanted to destroy them. Vehicle 2b is AGGRESSIVE, obviously.
Figure 3
Vehicles 2a and 2b in the vicinity of a source (circle with rays emanating from it). Vehicle 2b orients toward the source, 2a away from it.
\
I I
\
9 J Fear an<! Aggression
Vehicle 3
Love
The violence of Vehicle :z.b, no less than the cowardice of its companion :z.a, are traits that call for improvement. There is something very crude about a vehicle that can only be excited by the things it smells (or sees or feels or hears) and knows no soothing or relaxing stimuli. What comes to mind is to introduce some inhi- bition in the connections between the sensors and the motors, switching the sign of the influence from positive to negative. This will let the motor slow down when the corresponding sensor is activated. Again we can make two variants, one with straight and one with crossed connections (figure 4). Both will slow down in the presence of a strong stimulus and race where the stimulus is weak. They will therefore spend more time in the vicinity of the source than away fro_m it. They will actually come to rest in the immediate vicinity of the source.
But here we notice a difference between the vehicle with straight connections and the one with crossed connections. Approaching the source, the first (figure 4a) will orient toward it, since on an oblique course the sensor nearer to the source will slow down the motor on the same side, producing a turn. toward that side. The vehicle with straight connections will come to rest facing the
\
\
"
a
I '-:_ ,,.I I\'
Figure 4
Vehicle 3, with inhibitory influence of the sensors on the motors.
/
I
I
I
I2 I VEHICLE 3
source. The vehicle with crossed connections (figure 4b) for analo- gous reasons will come to rest facing away from the source and may not stay there very long, since a slight perturbation could cause it to drift away from the source. This would lessen the source's inhibitory influence, causing the vehicle to speed up more and more as it gets away.
You will have no difficulty giving names to this sort of behavior. These vehicles LIKE the source, you will say, but in different ways. Vehicle 3a LOVES it in a permanent way, staying close by in quiet admiration from the time it spots the source to all future time. Vehicle 3b, on the other hand, is an EXPLORER. It likes the nearby source all right, but keeps an eye open for other, perhaps stronger sources, which it will sail to, given a chance, in order to find a more permanent and gratifying appeasement.
But this is not yet the full development of Vehicle 3. We are now ready to make a more complete model using all the behavioral traits at our disposal. Call it Vehicle 3c. We give it not just one pair of sensors but four pairs, tuned to different qualities of the environ- ment, say light, temperature, oxygen concentration, and amount of organic matter (figure 5). Now we connect the first pair to the motors with uncrossed excitatory connections, as in Vehicle 2a, the second pair with crossed excitatory connections, as in Vehicle 2b, and the third and the fourth pairs with inhibitory connections, crossed and uncrossed, as in Vehicles 3b and 3a.
This is now ·a vehicle with really interesting behavior. It dislikes high temperature, turns away from hot places, and at the same time seems to dislike light bulbs with even greater passion, since it turns toward them and destroys them. On the other hand it definitely seems to prefer a well-oxygenated environment and one containing many organic molecules, since it spends much of its time in such places. But it is in the habit of moving elsewhere when the supply of either organic matter or (especially) oxygen   low. You cannot help admitting that Vehicle 3c has a system of VALUES, and, come to
Figure 5
A multisensorial vehicle of brand 3c.
I4 I VEHICLE 3
think of it, KNOWLEDGE, since some of the habits it has, like de- stroying light bulbs, may look quite knowledgeable, as if the vehicle knows that light bulbs tend to heat up the environment and conse- quen.tly make it uncomfortable to live in. It also looks as if it knows about the possibility of making energy out of oxygen and organic matter because it prefers places where these two commodities are available.
But, you will say, this is ridiculous: knowledge implies a flow of information from the environment into a living being or at least into something like a living being. There was no such transmission of information here. We were just playing with sensors, motors, and connections: the properties that happened to emerge may look like knowledge but really are not. We should be careful with such words.
You are right. We will explain in a later chapter (on Vehicle 6) how knowledge may enter a system of connections. And we will introduce an alternative way of incorporating knowledge into the system in our chapter on Vehicle 7. In any case, once knowledge is incorporated, the resulting vehicle may look and behave quite like our Vehicle 3c.
Meanwhile I invite you to consider the enormous wealth of dif- ferent properties that we may give Vehicle 3c by choosing various sensors and various combinations of crossed and uncrossed, excit- atory and inhibitory, connections.
If you consider the possibility of strong and weak influences from the sensors to the motors, you realize that the variety becomes even greater. The vehicle may not care much about light but care very much about temperature. Its sense of smell may be much keener for organic matter than it is for oxygen or vice versa. And there may be
. many more than just four pairs of sensors and four sensory qual-
. ities: the vehicles may be equipped with all sorts of shrewd de- tectors of energy and of chemicals. But this is best discussed in connection with a new idea incorporated in the vehicles of the next
chapter.
THE HOW AND WHY WONDER BOOK OF 

ROBOTS 

and ELECTRONIC BRAINS 

Edited under the supervision of 

Dr. Paul E. Blackwood, Washington, D. C. 

Text and illustrations approved by 

Oakes A. White, Brooklyn Children's Museum, Brooklyn, N. Y. 

TRANSWORLD PUBLISHERS • LONDON 

Introduction 

Electronic computers are helping usher mankind into the Space Age. 
Without them it would be impossible for scientists to quickly supply crucial 
answers regarding flights into outer space- Robots and automatic computers 
arc also helpful in practical ways as we learn in this How and Why Wonder 
Book of Robots and Electronic Brains. Through pictures and numerous 
examples, this book gives the reader an understanding of both the practical 
and theoretical application of modern computing devices. 

Scientists are interested in discovering and testing basic concepts about 
phenomena and events in nature. Mathematicians develop mathematical 
ways of describing and predicting these events. The two groups support 
one another in making discoveries and in solving problems. Electronic 
computers offer a new basis for the cooperation needed to solve problems. 
Some of these problems would not be solved even in a lifetime without the 
assistance of computers. 

The advent of electronic computers and other forms of automation 
may result in social and economic changes of great significance, such as 
a shorter work week. To be well informed today, one needs to know about 
the uses and potential capacities of modern automatic devices. This How 
and Why Wonder Book of Robots and Electronic Brains will give a basis 
for understanding the many uses of electronic computers and will stimulate 
readers of all ages to think about the machines' effect on the future economic 
and scientific developments in our civilization. 

Paul E. Blackwood 

Dr. Blackwood Is * professional employee in the U. S. Office of Education. 
Thif book was edited by him tn his private capacity and no official support or 
endorsement by the Office of Education H (mended or should be Infrrrcd. 

This book has been specialty re-edited for publication 
in Grosi Britain. 

© 1964. by Wonder Book., Inc. 

All rights reserved under international and Pan-American Copyrijfat Conventions. 

Published pursuant in agreement with owner of the trademark. Wonder Books, Inc. New York, U.S. A. 

Published by Transworld Publishers, Basbley Hd., London. N.W.IO, 

Printed by Hunt Barnard & Co. Ltd.. at Ibt Sign of the Dolphin. Aylesbury. Buckinsruunsbin. 

Contents 

page 

ROBOTS IN OUR WORLD 4 

What are robots? 5 

Where did robots originate? 5 

What do robots look like? 6 
How are robots used in outer space? 7 

How do robots work? 8 

ROBOTS WITH ELECTRONIC 

BRAINS 9 

What are computers? 9 

What are the uses of computers? 10 

Who invented computers? 10 

What kinds of computers are there? 1 1 

What is an analogue computer? II 

What is a digital computer? 14 

HOW A COMPUTER WORKS 14 

What is meant by input? 15 

What is meant by processing? 1 5 

What is meant by output? 16 

What is the computer's logic? 16 
What do you need to build a 

simple computer? 17 

How will it work? 17 

How does the computer give 

the answers? 18 

THE ELEMENTS OF A 

MODERN COMPUTER 19 

Where is the storage element? 19 

What element does the computation? 20 
How do all the elements work 

together? 21 
How does a computer compare with 

other methods of solving a 

problem? 21 

A LANGUAGE FOR THE 

COMPUTER 22 

What is the binary number system? 22 
How do you count in the binary 

system? 22 
How are decimal numbers changed 

to binary symbols? 23 
Can the binary system give other 

answers? 24 

Can an electronic brain "think?" 25 

I * 

page 

How are problems given to a 

computer? 26 
How can you become a programmer? 28 

PUTTING THE COMPUTER TO 

WORK 28 
How are computers valuable for 

national defence? 29 
How do business and industry use 

computers? 30 
How are computers used to aid 

air and sea travel? 30 

How can computers help doctors? 3 1 
How does a computer become a 

translator? 32 

Does an electronic brain ever fail? 33 

THE LEARNING MACHINE 34 

Can a robot learn? 34 
How does the learning machine 

"learn?" 34 

How are learning machines used? 36 

THE TEACHING MACHINE 37 
What does a teaching machine 

look like? 37 
How does a teaching machine 

"teach?" 38 

Can machines replace teachers? 39 

ROBOTS TAKE OVER 39 

What is automation? 39 

What is feedback? 39 
Does automation put people out of 

work? 40 

AUTOMATION IN ACTION 42 
How is automation used in 

communications? 42 
How is automation used in 

transportation? 42 

How is automation used in industry ? 43 
Can robots do tasks that man could 

not do? 45 

What is telemetry? 46 

How far can we go ? 46 

COMPUTER TALK 47 

Robots in Our World 

The word "robot" in this age of modern science still carries with it a 
feeling of both hope and fear. The hope is that machines built to work like 
men will make life for the human race much pleasanter and happier. 
The fear is that robots may one day take over the world and that they may 
become the masters of all mankind. After you have finished reading this 
book, you should be able to make up your mind as to whether robots offer 
hope or should be feared. 

/ 

Scientists are finding many olher uses (or robot type devices. For example, a mechanized radio-controlled boat — called 
MOBY-DIC (Motorized Observation fllotelemetry >*acht-D«ta /ntegratlon and Control) — Is employed as an unmanned 
on-the-spot observer of the social behaviour of whales and porpoises In their natural habitat. This information — not 
obtainable in captivity — Is picked up by the robot's ears and eyes and transmitted for analysis to an oceanographic 
mother ship several mile* away. These members of the marine mammal family seem to Ignore the unassuming robot as 
long as It makes no hostile moves. 

What are 
robots? 

Not everyone agrees about what a robot 
"is," but most dictionaries 
and encyclopedias define 
it as a piece of machinery 
that does a job you would expect a 
human being to do. 

The idea of building a machine that 
can work and think like a man is not 
new. It has existed for centuries. Most 
early robot stories, however, were more 
fable than fact, like the "automatic" 
chess player devised by the German 
Wolfgang von Kempelen in 1768. This 
man-like machine had great success in 
playing against the best players of Eu- 
rope until it was discovered that there 
was a midget inside the robot who 
played the game very well. 

This robot was a fake; but recently 
scientists have been able to build elec- 
tronic ones that really can play chess. 
These machines, once taught the game, 
can usually beat human players, be- 
cause, unlike men, they never make the 
same mistake twice. And one such 
chess-playing robot is so well-mannered 
that it prints out the following message 
after winning a match: "Sorry, you lost. 
Thank you for a very interesting game." 

The word robot, or artificial being, 

comes from the 
Czech word to- 
botnick, an an- 
cient name given to a serf or slave. It 
was introduced into our modern lan- 

Where did robots 
originate? 

5 

MOBOT. the gentle robot, is strong enough to bend iron bars, but can also handle laboratory glasses with ease. 

guage in 1 922 by a Czech writer, Karel 
Capek, in his play called R.U.R. The 
initials that make up the play's title 
stand for Rossum's Universal Robots. 

In Capek's play, all the work in the 
world was done by man-like machines 
— the robots — which Rossum manu- 
factured in very large numbers. Every- 
thing went along very smoothly on 
earth. All the needs and pleasures of 
mankind were being fulfilled, just as 
long as the robots had no feelings of 
their own. Then, one day, the manager 
of the factory decided to make superior 
robots that had all the human feelings 
of happiness and pain. When this hap- 
pened, the robots revolted against their 
human masters and destroyed all man- 
kind. 

Since Capek's play, the robot has 
become a favourite character of the 

science-fiction writers. Today, however, 
robots are no longer paper creations. 
Real robots are among us — running 
factories, translating languages, chart- 
ing the paths of rockets, and calculating 
or forecasting almost anything we wish 
to know — though they are called many 
different names. 

What do robots 
look like? 

Most robots do not look like the tin can 

mechanical men 
that we see in 
comic strips, in 
films, or on television. In actual fact, 
our amazing new robots now being de- 
signed and built bear little likeness to 
man. In their work, however, they dupli- 
cate the skills performed by men and 
often do them much better. 

You see robots at work around your 
home everyday although you may not 

6 

have considered them as such. But, ac- 
cording to one definition, washing ma- 
chines, toasters, automatic coffeepots, 
electric heaters, and so forth, are all 
robots. They are machines that do the 
work that you would expect a human 
being to do. 

There are also robots doing jobs that 
are too dangerous for men to do. Pos- 
sibly the best known of these robots is 
"Mobot." This remote-control machine 
has six-foot long arms which contain 
hands, wrists, elbows and shoulders. 
Two television cameras placed on ris- 
ing, jointed tentacles serve as eyes. Ex- 
cept for the arms and eyes, Mobot looks 
like a big metal box mounted on wheels. 
The wires connecting this robot with its 
master carry more than 100 command 
channels and two television channels. 
Although designed to do the dangerous 
work of handling radioactive materials 
in research laboratories, Mobot may be 
used, at some future time, for undersea 
or outer space tasks. 

How are robots 
used in outer space? 

All of the satellites launched by the 

United States 
into outer 
space have had 
robots on board. These robots have 
sent back to their masters on earth, by 
way of radio, such important informa- 
tion or data on space as temperature, 
radiation, effects of gravity, and so on. 
From their lofty position in space they 
have even taken photographs of earth 
and other nearby planets. 

When the first spaceship lands on the 
moon or Mars or Venus, it will probably 
have on board robots rather than human 
beings. Robots, like Mobot, can map 
the surface of the moon's hidden side, 
make necessary geological studies, ex- 

Before lending a manned spaceship lo the moon, 
the United Stales plans lo explore the moon's surface 
with instruments. This robot-exploration will start 
with Ranger, an instrument capsule that is expected 
to land on the moon in the Ocean of Storms. It will 
be followed by the Surveyor, which will carry instru- 
ments and television cameras similar to those used 
by the weather satellite, Tiros. Surveyor will be fol- 
lowed by Prospector, which will be able to move 
along the surface of the moon like a tractor. All 
three are supposed to send back to earth vital data 
to be used to make a human landing less dangerous. 

Computers are used in many industries. In houn they solve mathematical problems that would take a man 
more than a lifetime. They ore used in jet aircraft design, in missile control, in payroll make up, in 
calculations of the petroleum industry, and innumerable other applicant 

plore unknown regions, and even build 
landing areas for future spaceships. 
They will help to make it safer for hu- 
mans when they arrive later. 

return to its operato 

How do 
robots work? 

While other robots look a great deal 
different from Moboi. 
their basic operation 
is the same. The most 
important part of their operation is the 
man who gives them their instructions. 
These instructions are given to the ma- 
chine through wires or by radio (or 
may be stored in the robot itself). To 
make the machine follow its masters 
wishes, power must be supplied either 
through other wires or from a self-con- 
tained source such as a battery. 

The robot, equipped with instructions 
and power, may contain some type of 
sensing device, which could be a tele- 
vision camera, a radiation (Geiger) 
counter, or a magnetometer (a piece of 
equipment used to find oil and other 
minerals). These sensing devices can be 
compared to the human's eyes and nose 
and allow the robot to gather the in- 

formation to return to its operator. 

The robot may have grasping de- 
vices similar to human arms and hands. 
Following instructions, the robot can 
pick up and move objects, just as a man 
might do. To do this, some type of ar- 
rangement is usually necessary to tell 
the operator how hard the hands or 
claws are gripping, plus other informa- 
tion. (In the case of Mobot, micro- 
phones on the wrists allow the operator 
to "hear' the hands at work.) Some 
robots are powerful enough to tie iron 
bars into knots and lift over 20 tons 
of weight, and yet they are so sensitive 
that they can make cakes or pour glasses 
of water without any breakage. 

8 

Robots with Electronic Brains 

Of ail the robots that are among us today, those with electronic 
brains, called computers, promise in the next few years to revolutionize 
our way of life. These robotistic devices eliminate the drudgery from many 
jobs and offer a great deal more leisure time to their human masters. While 
they were originally developed to aid in the solution of certain scientific 
problems, computers have turned out to be so generally useful that they 
are now being employed in many different types of work. 

If you were to look up the word "com- 
puter" in a dictionary, 
you would find it de- 
fined as "a machine 

What are 
computers? 

that solves mathematical problems." 
Today, these amazing machines range 
from small desk devices for "doing 
sums" to room size units that can solve 
complex mathematical problems in less 
time than the twinkling of an eye. 

While computers are sometimes 
called "thinking machines," or "robots 
that think," these names are misleading. 
No machine can really think in the usual 
sense, but these computers do many im- 
portant and exciting things. By using 
their ability to solve complex mathe- 
matical problems, computers can pre- 
dict the paths of satellities, guide 
ballistics missiles in flight, or spot high- 

altitude weather conditions and warn us 
of storms, tornadoes and hurricanes 
faster and more accurately than any 
weather-forecasting device ever used. 

Computers do mathematical prob- 
lems in hours that would take more than 
a man's lifetime to solve with paper and 
pencil. They help major industry per- 

The industries shown on pages 8 and 9 are jus) a 
few examples of today's uses of computers. Innumer- 
able other uses could be mentioned. 

I 

form its manufacturing operations bet- 
ter, for with their aid, skilled men can 
control complex combinations of ma- 
chines. 

What are the uses 
of computers? 

Computers affect our lives in many 

ways. Every day 
they handle mil- 
lions of pay 
cheques and bank accounts. They are 
now being used by farmers to tell them 
when to plant their crops, what to feed 
the animals, how much water is needed 
by the crops, and many other important 
facts. This technological revolution in 
farming offsets the increasing food de- 
mands of our skyrocketing population. 
Speaking of our rapidly growing popu- 
lation, it is computers that help the 
statisticians to keep count of people 
in countries all over the world. 

But computers go far beyond these 
uses to other services less well-known. 
They influence the design of almost 

every product of advanced technology: 
jet aircraft, nuclear reactors, power 
plants, bridges, and chemical factories. 
For instance, at the Space Flight Center 
in Huntsville, Alabama, two powerful 
electronic brains, each capable of add- 
ing nearly 14 million figures a minute, 
are helping to design the huge Saturn 
space craft. Saturn, destined for flights 
around the moon and deep into space, 
will be "flown" thousands of times on 
these computers before it reaches the 
launching pad. 

Who invented 
computers? 

The electronic computer, among the 
foremost American 
inventions of this 
century, was not an 
overnight discovery. It is the fruit of the 
practical science of mathematics and 
has its roots far in the past. 

From counting on his fingers, man 
gradually progressed to pebbles on the 
ground ... to pellets of bronze, sliding 

A principal target of 
the Saturn space vehi- 
cle Is the execution of a 
flight around the moon 
to explore the other 
side of this heavenly 
body. The actual flights 
cost millions of dollars. 
For only several hun- 
dred dollars, a flight 
can be simulated math- 
ematically on the IBM 
7090 computer. Here, 
the calculation of a 
moon orbit Is being 
studied at the Marshall 
Space Flight Center In 
Huntsville, Alabama. At 
the left is a model 
of Saturn's powerful 
super-booster. 

on a grooved board ... to beads strung 
on framed wires . . . and to the abacus. 
(See illustration, pages 12-13) The first 
adding machine, invented in 1642, was 
followed by a four-operation arithmetic 
machine composed of a difference en- 
gine that performed calculations, a 
mechanical tabulator, a punch-paper 
control system, and a differential ana- 
lyzer. Although these inventions in- 
creased computation speeds, they failed 
to fulfil the needs of our complex world. 

More than a century ago, Charles 
Babbage, an English mathematician, 
designed an "analytical engine" which 
was an automatic computing machine 
as we use the term today. His idea was 
not completely fulfilled because no one 
could make the required mechanical 
parts with the needed accuracy. 

In 1936, a young Harvard physicist, 
Professor Howard Aiken, happened 
upon some of the writings of Dr. Bab- 
bage. Like Babbage, Dr. Aiken saw the 
possibility of a robot that could do the 
thinking of hundreds of men in a frac- 
tion of the time it took any one of them 
to work out routine mathematical prob- 
lems. Aiken teamed up with other re- 
searchers and, by 1944, they built the 
first workable computer. 

Two years later, the first general- 
purpose, all-electronic computer, called 
the eniac computer (from Electric Nu- 
merical Integrator and Calculator), 
was built. 

eniac was the grandfather of today's 
electronic brains, room-size robots who 
answer to the unlikely names of univac. 

STRETCH, MANIAC, UNICALL, MINIVAC, 

seac, and bizmac. 

What kinds of 
computers are there? 

There are two basic types of computers 

in use today 
— analogue 
and digital. 
While they are very unlike in their con- 
struction, operation and use, both deter- 
mine a given amount or quantity. The 
analogue type determines its quantity by 
measurement of how much while the 
digital type determines its quantity by 
counting how many. 

An analogue computer is usually built 

to be an anal- 

What is an 

analogue computer? 

ogy or a physi- 

cal likeness of 
the problem that it is designed to solve. 
It may work, however, with physical 
quantities far different from those con- 
nected with the problem it is solving. 
Usually the answers are recorded on a 
calibrated scale, traced on a graph by a 
pen, indicated on a plotting board, or 
shown on a dial. An analogue computer 
is generally designed to solve a single 
problem, or a specific class of problems. 

There are many common uses for 
simple analogue devices. One example 
is the familiar car speedometer. It 
changes the rate of turning of the 
wheel's axle into a numerical value of 
speed in terms of miles per hour. As we 
know, the more rapidly the car's axle 
turns, the higher the speed we read on 
the speedometer. In this case, we are 
interested in the speed of the vehicle 
rather than how fast the axle is turning. 
But, the analogy or physical quantity of 
this speed is the axle turning. Slide rules, 
thermometers, clocks, and weight scales 
are examples of this type of computer. 

1 1 

Many primitives, having advanced from flngercount- 
ing, used pebbles as counters. Peruvian Incos used 
knotted ropes called quipus for counting. 

Before early man had 
any words or symbols 
for numbers, he used his 
fingers to count. 

The early abacus was 
nothing but pebbles in 
grooves in the sand. 

I " I l' ill 

'".'•il 

The Roman abacus was made of 
melol, and small balls were used in 
each column. 

While the abacus has had many shapes and different 
names, depending on when and where it was used, 
its basic operation remains unchanged. It has indi- 
vidual columns with beads or marbles. The columns 
are orronged in the numeral position or decimal sys- 
tem used in the ancient Near East. Let's look at the 
earliest, the counting board of the Babylonian trad- 
ers: three rows of pebbles; no column can have more 
than 9 pebbles. Let's add 263 to 349. First set up 
the pebbles to indicate 263: 2 hundreds, 6 fens and 

3 units. Now odd pebbles to signify 349: 3 hundreds, 

4 tens and 9 units. Since no column con have more 
than 9 pebbles, move the pebbles over from right to 
left and you hove as result 6 hundreds, 1 ten and 
2 units, or 612, 

*> 

12 

A few years ago, a Chinese-American bookkeeper 
with an abacus won a race againsl an electronic 

calculating machine. 

The Pascal adding machine of 1642 labovel and 
Burroughs (below) were only steppingstones to the 
modern "miracles." 

Ihe beads above the crossbar on a Chinese abacus 
are called quints and count 5 each when pushed 
down to the bar; the beads below count 1 each when 
pushed up to the bar. Each wire strung with beads 
is called a column ond represents one column of 
figures in the decimal system. The figure shown in 
the obacus above left is: 27,503.040. 

"How far" and "How last?" are two questions answered by two kinds of analogue computers in 
your car, the "odometer" that gives the mileage you have driven and the "speedometer" that gives 
the approximate speed you are driving. Their working is relatively easy: ft is established how many 
turns the wheel of your car has to make to roll a mile and a special flexible shaft is installed to transmit 
the number of wheal revolutions to a counter on your dashboard. The counter, which is a series of 
little wheels with numbors from 0 to 9, is constructed in such a way that, when one little wheel 
turns around once completely, it clicks the neighbouring wheel over one number. In this way all 
units of miles are registered. The speedometer works on the same flexible shaft as the odometer, 
only here the turning of the wheel of ihe car creates magnetic fields. As you see In our illustration, 
the speedometer consists of a disc (mostly ailTrnTnTOm). A pointer is attached to the disc with a wire- 
spring that tends to pull the pointer towards zero. As we already said, a permanent magnet attached 
to the flexible shaft turns faster when the car goes faster, and creates a magnetic field In the aluminium 
disc, which will tend to turn the disc and pointer away from zero. The faster the car goes, the stronger 
the pull, and the farther the pointer will point away from zero. 

MAGNET 

13 

While these examples of analogue 
computers are quite simple ones, this 
type is also used for many complex pur- 
poses. The electronic kind, for in- 
stance, is used for navigation, missile 
guidance and anti-aircraft fire control. 
The latter, called gun director com- 
puters, are used to aim and fire guns at 
hostile planes. If you have ever tried 
to shoot a rifle at a moving target, you 
can imagine the complexity of a com- 
puter required to aim a gun and hit a 
hostile plane above 40,000 feet in the 
air and travelling at speeds higher than 
600 miles per hour. No human being 
can solve all the calculations — speed 
of the wind, direction of the plane, how 
fast it is going, etc. — quickly enough 
to do this job, but an electronic ana- 
logue computer can do it with ease. 

What is a 
digital computer? 

The fuel gauge of a car Is another example of an 
analogue computer. It Indicates what proportion 
of the tank la filled with petrol. 

Digital computers are the most widely 

used computing 
robots today, be- 
cause they are a 
great deal more accurate and will do 
more types of work than the analogue 
types. The digital computers do not 
measure; they count. They owe their 
name to the counting number on our 
ten fingers or digits. Because we have 
10 digits instead of twelve, or six, or 
eight, most computation is based on the 
familiar decimal system: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 
6, 7, 8, and 9. 

The simplest digital computer that 
we have is our fingers. Problems can be 
solved by counting them. A more com- 
plex digital computer with which we are 
familiar is the desk calculator. This 
machine can do everything — add, sub- 
tract, multiply and divide. 

The modern automatic electronic 
digital computer, often called a data- 
processing system, can carry out a long 
series of arithmetical and logical opera- 
tions on the basis of instructions given it 
at the start of the problem. Logical op- 
erations include such work as sorting, 
selecting, comparing, and matching var- 
ious kinds of information. 

How a Computer Works 

All modern digital computers have three basic steps in their operation. 
Information or data must be fed into the computer — input The 
information must be rearranged and solved in an orderly way — 
processing. The answer or solution must be fed back to the inquirer in an 
understandable form — output. 

14 

Our picture shows an IBM computer (in the background) which Is led with Information prepared by a tape punch (centre 
left). Samples of the punched tape are at top and bottom. 

What is meant 
by input? 

As with the other robots you read about 
earlier, a human be- 
ing must give the 
computer complete 
instructions before it can solve any 
problem or do any work. A set of such 
instructions is called a programme and 
is prepared by a man or woman called a 
programmer. It is his or her job to study 
the given problem, lay out a plan for its 
solution, and present the plan to the 
computer, together with all the neces- 
sary instructions as to how to use' it. 
Without the programmer, the computer 
would be useless. 

The programme may be fed into the 
input portion of the computer in several 
ways — through punched or tab cards, 
punched or perforated tape, magnetic 

tape (the most popular method), or on 
paper inscribed with special magnetic 
ink. The input information may be of 
a scientific, commercial, statistical, or 
engineering nature. 

The processing operation is carried on 
within the computer 

What is meant ._ , 

by processing? ,tSelL B * USin 8 ltS 

various parts or ele- 
ments, the computer calculates, sorts, 
matches, compares, and selects until it 
arrives at the desired answer to the 
problem given it. 

While this processing operation is go- 
ing on, the entire procedure is checked 
by a man, called the operator, at the 
computer's control panel. It is his duty 
to make sure that the computer is func- 

15 

tioning in the proper manner. He can 
start and stop the computer and regu- 
late its activity. He can send in new 
instructions or corrections given to him 
by the programmer, and can test various 
parts of the computer to see if they are 
working normally. 

After doing its work, the computer gives 
its answer back to 

What is meant , 

_ the programmer. 

by output? _, , , 

The results may be 
punched into cards or tape, or recorded 
on magnetic tape like the tape used on 
a home recorder. The programmer can 
then translate the machine's answer to 
data for all who arc interested. Many 
of the newer computers have printing 
devices that take the machine's output 
and change it into a printed report form 
easily understood by all. These printers, 
as they are called, make it unnecessary 
for programmers to interpret computer 
answers. 

What is the 
computer's logic? 

One of the hardest points to understand 

about the opera- 
tion of a computer 
is how it can make 
a logical decision. When we come to a 
logical decision of a problem, we do so 
by a process of thinking or reasoning. 
We search our memories or look into 
books for the facts on the subject and 

The automatic toll collector is a 
computer- type device. It makes 
"logical decisions" as to whether 
the proper amount of money has 
been deposited. 

make our decision based on these facts. 
While a computer cannot think or rea- 
son as we do, it reaches its logical deci- 
sions from the facts given to it by its 
programmer. 

Possibly the simplest example of a 
computer-like system is the ordinary 
light switch. The problem in this case 
is: When the switch is closed, are all 
conditions present for the bulb to 
light? The conditions are such facts as 
whether or not the electric current is on, 
the light bulb good, the room properly 
wired, etc. If the answer is "yes" to all 
the conditions, the bulb will light when 
the switch is turned on. The computer 
system, in effect, will be giving its logi- 
cal answer based on the fact that all 
conditions are present for the bulb to 
light when the signal is given. 

Another example of a computer-type 
device is the automatic toll collector 
seen on many motorways and bridges in 

16 

the United States. This device has the 
responsibility of making a logical deci- 
sion as to whether or not the proper 
amount of money has been deposited by 
the driver to pay the toll. 

Let us assume that a 10f- toll is to be 
collected by the computer. This pay- 
ment can be paid by depositing: one 
dime; two nickels; one nickel and five 
pennies; or ten pennies. The automatic 
toll collector will receive its input ( the 
coins) and process them. It will then 
make its logical decision based on the 
fact as to whether or not the payment 
by the driver is sufficient. If the answer 
is "yes," the device will indicate to the 
driver that he may go ahead. However, 
if the computer reaches the logical deci- 
sion that insufficient money has been 
deposited, it will flash a "stop" signal 
and will sound an alarm so that the 
guards are immediately notified of its 
negative decision. 

Although most digital computers cost 

thousands of 

What do you j 

■ . . ... pounds, you can 

need to build *' 

a simple computer? buiId one that 

will answer "yes" 
or "no" to simple questions for a few 
shillings. Here is what you need: two 
mechanical switches, a flashlight bat- 
tery, a flashlight bulb and some wire. 
Remember, this is going to be a very 
simple computer. But it may surprise 
you all the same. 

You can build a simple computer that wilt help you 
to understand the difficult subject of the working of 
electronic brains. 

How will 
it work? 

As a computer designer, your problem 
is this: with the parts 
named above, build a 
computer that will give 
a recognizable signal when both of two 
necessary conditions are fulfilled. You 
can consider the light bulb as the output 
of the computer, and the switches, each 
of which you may open or close by 
hand, as the inputs. 

17 

When the parts are properly con- 
nected, the computer will cause the bulb 
to light up, signalling, "Yes, both con- 
ditions are fulfilled." When the bulb is 
dark, the computer is saying, "No, both 
conditions are not fulfilled." 

You have probably already worked this 
out. Connect the 

How does the ... 

switches with the 

computer give 

the answers? batterv . and bulb as 

shown in figure 1. In 
this way, both switches must be closed 
for the bulb to light up. When only one 
switch is closed or when both are open, 
the bulb will be dark. Simple? Yes. But 
when you consider the logical opera- 
tions performed by this computer, they 
are really quite impressive: 

It accepts information as input (the 

switches are open or closed ) . 

It makes a decision based on the 

input (are both switches closed?). 

It takes action based on this decision 

(either the bulb lights or remains 

unlit). 

By rearranging the switches, you can 
build a computer that will decide 
automatically whether either of the 
switches are closed, and will light the 
bulb signalling, "Yes, at least one of the 
two possible conditions has been ful- 
filled." (Fig. 2.) 

By combining the two circuits or ar- 
rangements, you can make a computer 
that will have four inputs and one 
output and will answer this question: 
Are inputs one and two present? If they 
are, is either input three or input four 
present?" Having examined the inputs 
and found the answers to these two 

no. i 

questions, the computer will go on to 
decide: "If the answer to both of 
these questions is 'yes/ light the bulb." 
Fig. 3 shows how you would wire this 
computer. 

By this time the computer is doing a 
job of deciding that might actually be 
useful, and doing it a good deal faster 
than you could. If you do not believe 
this, build it and try to beat it. 

Slightly more complicated arrange- 
ments of switches can be made to pro- 
duce an output only when one input is 
present and the other is not. It is pos- 
sible, by interconnecting circuits each 
of which does one logical operation, to 
create arrangements capable of answer- 
ing all sorts of difficult questions. Com- 
puter kits that contain all the parts and 
drawings to make such arrangements 
are available at radio supply stores. 

Instead of mechanical switches and 
flashlight bulbs, the modern computer 
uses much more rapid electronic devices 
for switching and registering, such as 
vacuum tubes, transistors and magnetic 
cores. But the idea is the same as the 
computer just described. 

1 8 

The Elements of a Modern Computer 

The modern electronic computer is not really a single piece of 
equipment but a series of five closely related parts or elements, each of 
which must function smoothly with the other four for the system to be 
useful. These five elements are: input, storage, arithmetic, control and 
output. 

You are already familiar with two of these elements, the input and the 
output. If you were to see a real computer in action, you could watch the 
input-output equipment functioning, carrying information to the system 
and answers to the programmer. In our simple computer, the input is 
actually supplied by the movement of your hand, which opens or closes 
the two switches. Output is the flashlight bulb that lights up to signal 
"yes," stays dark when the answer to the question is "no." 

Where is the 
storage element? 

The switches themselves perform an ex- 
tremely important 
function in the 
computing circuit. 
They store the input, making it avail- 
able to the computer throughout the 
process of computation. They store the 
information as to whether or not they 
are closed, since open means, "no in- 
put," and closed means, "input." You 
may never see the storage unit in a real 
computer since it is placed in a metal 
cabinet. But its function is exactly the 
same: it stores input in a form usable 
by the computer, and holds it ready for 
immediate use at any time during its 
operation. 

In modern computers, the storage 
element also serves as a "memory" and 
information can be internally stored 
in the system by electro-mechanical, 
magnetic, or electronic devices, until 
needed. Stored information is readily 
available, can be referred to once or 
many times, and can also be replaced 

whenever desired. The data memorized 
by this element can be original informa- 
tion, reference tables, or instructions. 

INPUT 

CONTROL 

< 

STORAGE 
(MEMORY) 

PROCESSING 

OUTPUT 

Parts of a digital computer and their functions. 

19 

INPUT-OUTPUT AND INPUT-OUTPUT AND 

SECONDARY STORAGE STORAGE AND PROCESSING SECONDARY STORAGE 
ARITHMETIC ElfMENT 

\ 

Actual arrangement and location of the various vital parts of a digital computer. 

Each storage location is identified by 
an individual location number which is 
called an address. By means of these 
numerical addresses, the programmer 
can locate information and instructions 
as needed during the course of a prob- 
lem. In other words, when the program- 
mer wishes to take information out of 
the storage element he does not specify 
the data itself, but only its address. He 
knows that the information he wants is 
stored at that address because he him- 
self stored it there earlier. 

Actually the memory unit of the com- 
puter can be compared with a library, 
which stores books, just as the memory 
stores data. Each book in the library is 
given a code number, just as each bit 
of information in the memory elements 
receives a number. These book numbers 
permit the librarian to quickly find any 
book stored in the library without read- 
ing the titles on the books, just as the 
address permits the programmer to lo- 
cate any data in the memory unit. 

The speed of processing largely de- 
pends on the access rime — the length 
of time required to obtain a number 
from storage and make it available to 
other elements of the computer system. 

What element does 
the computation? 

The element of the computer that 

does the actual 
work of compu- 
tation is called 
the arithmetic element. In our com- 
puter, this element is composed of the 
switches, wires, and battery. In most 
useful computers, the arithmetic ele- 
ment can add, subtract, multiply, di- 
vide, and compare numbers in a manner 
similar to a desk calculator, but at light- 
ning speed. Complex calculations are 
always combinations of these basic op- 
erations. The arithmetic element also 
can make logical or reasoning decisions. 

In most modern computers, the stor- 
age unit is completely separate from the 
arithmetic element, though connected 
to it. By sending electric currents back 

20 

and forth between themselves, these ele- 
ments are able to communicate; the 
storage sends information to the arith- 
metic element for processing, and the 
arithmetic unit sends back the proc- 
essed information to storage. 

The lines of communication between 

the storage and 
How do all ... . . 

, . arithmetic elements 

the elements 

work together? in our modeI com- 
puter are fixed. In 

more complicated circuits or networks, 
however, there may be a number of 
alternative paths between storage and 
arithmetic elements: One path could 
lead to a network whose sole function 
was to add two numbers; another to a 
network which did nothing but com- 
pare the sizes of two numbers, and so 
forth. To decide which of these paths 
should be used each time a connection 
is made between the storage and arith- 
metic units, the computer has a control 
element. 

The control unit in the computer can 
be compared with a railway switch- 
yard control tower. There are many 
possible directions that the switching 
engine can be routed, but the man in the 
control tower pulls the proper levers to 
get it on the proper track so that it 
reaches its desired destination. In the 
computer, the control element, under 
instructions from the programmer, 
makes the necessary switch connections 
throughout the system so that the data 
can follow its proper path to reach the 
desired destination. Because of the 
speed required in routing information, 
the switching mechanism in modern 
computers, properly called the auto- 

matic sequence control unit, is an elec- 
tronic device rather than a mechanical 
one as it is in the railway control tower. 

How does a 
computer compare with 
other methods of 
solving problems? 

Now that you know the purpose of the 

various parts 
of a com- 
puter, let us 
compare 
their func- 
tioning to the steps needed in solving a 
problem by paper and pencil methods. 
The input would correspond to the in- 
formation given in the problem. The 
arithmetic element performs the same 
function as our manual calculations. 
Storage may be compared to the work 
papers on which we note intermediate 
answers. A knowledge of arithmetic 
rules controls our handling of the prob- 
lem and our answers provide an output. 

The control unit of a computer is like a railway control tower. 

A Language for the Computer 

The gap between man and machine is bridged by a language that is 
understandable to both. This language makes the operation of the 
computer possible. Fortunately for computer designers, a language that 
combines the utmost simplicity of writing with complete generality of 
expression was already available when the first large-scale, electronic 
computer was designed and built. The language, known as the binary 
number system, was originally used to represent and handle numbers only. 
But during the development of the truly general purpose computer, it has 
been expanded so that it will now handle letters and symbols as well. 

Binary (bi means two) uses only two 
.... symbols, 1 and 

What is the binary « , 

number system? °> rather than 

the ten decimal 
numbers (0 — 9), and the twenty-six 
letters we normally use. The machine 
finds this system simple. You will too. 

As you can see in the chart on page 
23, the decimal numbers are compared 
with the corresponding binary symbols. 
Notice that shifting a decimal number 
one place to the left multiplies its value 
by ten, whereas shifting a binary num- 
ber one position to the left multiplies its 
value by two. Thus, the symbol 1 in the 
binary system can be used to represent 
one, two, four, eight, or sixteen, depend- 
ing on its position or place. 

Let us use the binary system to do some 
actual counting. To 

How do you „ 

. ■ .L represent zero in 
count in the r t , _ 

binary system? binarv > the symbol 0 
is used. "One" is 
shown as 1, as in the decimal system. 
To show "two," when both available 
symbols already have been used we 
use some combination of the two. For 

example, the combination 1 0 can stand 
for "two." 'Three" is 1 1. For "four," 
we must use three digits: 1 0 0. "Five" 
becomes 10 1; "six" 1 1 0; "seven," 
111. We must add a fourth digit for 
"eight," which is 1 0 0 0. "Nine" is 
1 00 1, and so forth. 

Whereas the binary system suits 
computers, it is not nearly so practical 
for ordinary numerical problems as the 
decimal system because more digits are 
required to express numbers. For exam- 
ple, the number "thirty-nine" can be 
indicated in the decimal system by only 
two digits: a 3 and 9. Six digits would 
be needed in the binary system: "thirty- 
nine" would be written 10 0 1 1 I . The 
large number 10000000000 in the 
binary system stands for "one thousand 

DECIMAL 

SYSTEM 

THIS 

NUMiEK- 4 

4 

4 

4 

I 

M 

8 

i 

M 

1 

4.1000 

4.100 

4.10 

4x1 

means-* 4,000 + 400 + 40 4 4,444 

22 

BINARY SYSTEM 

, r 

r 

r 

2' 

2° 

SIXTKN5 

EIGHTS 

FOUBS 

TWOS 

ONSS 

2*2*2*2 

2*2*2 

2*2 

2 

1 

16 

8 

4 

2 

1 

DECIMAL 
EQUIVALENT 

1 

1 

1 

o 

2 

1 

1 

3 

1 

O 

0 

4 

1 

O 

1 

5 

1 

1 

0 

6 

1 1 1 

7 

O 

0 

o 

8 

O 

0 

1 

9 

o 

1 

0 

10 

0 

1 

1 

11 

1 

o 

o 

12 

1 

o 

1 

13 

1 

1 

0 

14 

1 

1 

1 

15 

O 

o 

0 

o 

16 

i 

0 

o 

0 

1 

17 

-i 

O 

o 

1 

o 

18 

i 

O 

o 

1 

1 

19 

i 

O 

1 

o 

0 

20 

twenty-four." The same number in the 
decimal system is expressed by four 
digits (1,024). But, with modern com- 
puters, it does not matter how many 

digits are used to indicate numbers be- 
cause of the lightning speed at which 
these machines operate. 

The modern computers can store 
many digits in their memory units, too. 
Early ones were considered marvels if 
they had internal storage capacity for 

1,000 decimal digits. New machines 
routinely store the equivalent of more 

than 320,000 decimal digits, while the 
more powerful computers have provi- 
sions for internal storage of more than 
one and a half million decimal digits, 
each available on command from the 
programmer in little more than 2 mil- 
lionths of a second. 

The programmer might be able to 

change or trans- 
How are decimal . . 

... late the entire 

numbers changed 

to binary symbols? contents of a 

problem into a bi- 
nary notation by hand. But it is a good 
bet that he would have a headache when 
he was finished. Fortunately, machines 
have been designed to accept decimal 
numbers and can change them to the 
binary system. 

These machines, which look and op- 
erate like ordinary typewriters, can also 
translate the letters of an alphabet into 
the binary system and they do the entire 
job automatically. As fast as the infor- 
mation can be typed in on the keyboard 
— the keys of which are marked with 
Arabic numerals and English letters — 
the machine translates it into a pattern 
of binary ones and zeros onto cards or 
tape, which is fed into the computer. In 
addition to being faster than the "by- 
hand" method, it is a good deal more 

23 

accurate, since the automatic translator 
almost never makes a mistake. 

The answer from the computer's out- 
put is also received on cards or tape and 
fed through another translator that 
will deliver the desired information to 
the programmer in decimal numbers 
and English letters. Sometimes a unit 
called a high-speed printer is used. This 
senses and prints whole lines of infor- 
mation at a time, instead of individual 
characters, working at the rate of more 
than 1,000 lines a minute. 

Can the binary 
system give 
other answers? 

The binary system can be made to cor- 
respond to the con- 
ditions of an electric 
or electronic circuit 
— on or off. Using 
the principle of the switch, the "on" 
condition may represent "1," and "off 
may represent "0." The binary number 
10 0 1 1 1 , equivalent to the decimal 
number 39, would appear: 

on 

off off 

on 

on 

on 

Because electronic circuits are used, a 

ElECTRICAl CONTACT 
THROUGH HOLE 

STRANDED COPPER WIRE BRUSH 

MfTAl ROLLER WITH 
ElECTRICAl CURRENT 

V 

holes Carry 

information 

The earliest card punch- 
ing machines were 
hand operated. Fads 
were punched into each 
card according to a 
definite pattern. A pre- 
arranged code as- 
signed a particular 
meaning to each sepa- 
rate position of the 
hole in the card. 

The punched holes in the card repre- 
sent the information with which the 
computer has to work. The metal roller 
carries the electrical current. The elec- 
trical circuit is closed by the copper 
wire brushes when the punched hole 
is between the brush and roller. 

Today, the Card Punch combines 
efficiency and speed with simplicity 
and ease of operation. A movable 
typewriter-like keyboard ollows the 
operator to punch numerical and al- 
phabetical dato smoothly and rapidly. 

All systems "go" woi the command given by the computers for the launching of the astronauts. 

vast chain of binary digits can be ex- 
pressed and tabulated at very, very 
great speeds. 

The binary numerals can also repre- 
sent logical conditions such as "Jes" 
(binary 1) or "no" (binary 0), "right" 
(binary 1) or "wrong" (binary 0). 
Hence, the modern computer, by using 
the binary, can make simple decisions 
about complex questions. For exam- 
ple, in Colonel Glenn's manned orbital 
flight, it was a computer that gave the 
"go" signal that everything was fine 
aboard during the launching of the 
space capsule. 

For the computer to reach this all- 
important logical decision, the program- 
mer fed into the machine beforehand 
such information as the proper speed 
and direction of the rocket, desired 
flight characteristics, Glenn's proper 
breathing and heartbeat rate, plus over 
40,000 other bits of vital data. This 
information was stored in the memory 

element. Then when the actual launch- 
ing took place, all the information from 
the rocket and about the astronaut's 
condition were fed into the computer 
and compared with the data already 
stored there. In less than 30 seconds, 
the computer had to make its recom- 
mendation. No man or group of men 
could make this important decision so 
fast; but the computer gave its answer 
by simply causing a bulb to light up on 
its front panel, signalling, "Yes, all con- 
ditions are fulfilled for a safe launching 
of the space capsule." 

Can machines out-think the men who 

build them? Is it 

Can an electronic ... - 

brain "think?" Possible for a 
computer to come 
up with a new idea? Are we in danger of 
being overrun by electronic brains 
whose actions may not do as we wish? 

If you build the computer described 
earlier, you will see that it operates only 

25 

on information you give it. Computers 
can not "think." They do no more than 
you tell them to do. If you feed yours 
incorrect information, it will give you 
incorrect answers. In addition, you must 
tell it exactly what to do, step by step. 
Bluntly, a computer does not have an 
ounce of imagination. 

As you have read earlier, a programmer 

must organize 

How are problems , 

' r . - and restate 

given fo a computer? 

the problem 
in terms that a computer can under- 
stand. One technique used by pro- 
grammers is to prepare flow or block 
diagrams. These diagrams arrange the 
steps of a process in order and show how 
the steps are related to one another. 
They aid memory and force precise 
thinking. They show the computer how 
to solve a problem. 

For instance, how do you get to 
school in the morning? A flow diagram 
of this problem might be the one given 
in Fig. 1 . This may be enough for you, 
but it is not detailed enough for a com- 
puter. Your mind makes connections 
readily. It fills in gaps from past experi- 
ence. Computers need a simple, step- 
by-step plan with complete instructions, 
such as shown here in Fig. 2. 

Programmers also use many mathe- 
matical techniques. One method, 
symbolic logic, involves representing 
statements logically by mathematical 
equations. This system makes it possible 
to change logical statements in the same 
way that you work with algebraic equa- 
tions in your mathematics class. It is 
named Boolean Algebra after its inven- 
tor, George Boole. Computer men also 

26 

use the theory of probability and com- 
plicated techniques such as Monte 
Carlo simulation, matrix algebra, and 
multiple regression. These complex 
mathematical solutions are too difficult 
to explain in this book. As a matter of 
fact, many mathematicians did not use 
them prior to the introduction of com- 
puters because of the time required 
to solve problems by following these 
techniques. 

Programmers sometimes develop 
mathematical models of real situations 
or processes. Here is an extremely sim- 
ple example: 

COST OF APPLES IN PENCE - 
3d. X NUMBER OF APPLES 

This equation is a "model" of an actual 
buying situation. It predicts the cost of 
any number of apples. No apples need 
ever be purchased in order to get an- 
swers. All aspects of this limited situa- 
tion can be explored without spending 
a penny. 

In actual practice, the preparation of 
mathematical models is a complex, 
exacting, and time-consuming job. It 
requires a thorough knowledge and un- 
derstanding of the problem or process 
under study. Programmers often spend 
weeks, even months, observing and 
studying before they begin the mathe- 
matical model for which a final pro- 
gramme will be prepared. 

GET UP 

GET READY 

GO 

A flow diagram of "How do you get to school in the 
morning?" as stated above would be enough for 
you, but not for the machine. The flow diagram on 
page 27 would be more to the machine's "liking." 

HOW TO GET TO SCHOOL IN THE MORNING 

ALARM 

NOTE THAT IN THIS DIAGRAM RECTANGLES ARE USED TO 
INDICATE EITHER CALCULATIONS OR THE TRANSFER OP INFOR- 
MATION. DIAMONDS ARE USED FOR SIMPLE YES-NO DECI- 
SIONS. INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE MACHINE ARE ALSO INCLUDED. 

1 

HAVING NO 

TODAY? 

PRETEND 
ILLNESS 

NO 

1 

MOTHER? 

1 YES 

GET SACK 1 
IN BED 

DEAD END 

1 

WALK 

DOOR 
1 

GO BACK 
GET BOOKS 

FORGET 
BOOKS? 

YES 

NO 

GET ON 
SCHOOL 
BUS 

I 

ARRIVE 

AT 
SCHOOl 

27 

No one can give you a good answer to 

this question. 

How can you ~. - 

. * I he profes- 

become a programmer? r 

sion IS SO 

new, and is changing so fast, that the 
most practical approach is to look at 
what a programmer must be. 

First, he must be a language expert. 
The languages he uses are not all spo- 
ken languages like English, French, or 
Spanish. Some are universal languages, 
understood by scientists and technical 
people the world over. These are math- 
ematics and the language of reasoning 
or logic. Maybe you do not think of 
mathematics as a language, but it is. It 
is one means used by men of science 
to communicate with each other. 

A programmer must know these four 
languages: 

1. His native tongue. 

2. The language of the flow or block 
diagram. 

3. The language of logic or reason. 

4. The language of the specific com- 
puter with which he is working. 
This includes the codes of let- 
ters, binary digits, or combina- 
tions of them. 

• -..J 

DETECTION STATION 

In addition, the programmer must be 
able to study, analyze, and plan prob- 
lems so that he can reduce them into 
the small, simple parts a computer can 
handle. Thus, a person with an 
economic or engineering college degree 
or a background in mathematics may 
be the most successful candidate for a 
career in computer programming. 

Putting the Computer to Work 

Though computers have been in use for only a decadp or so, they 
have already influenced the lives of millions of people. It would be 
impossible to list all the jobs that we are handing over to this marvellous 
machine. Programmers are finding new applications for it each day. While 
many uses have already been given, here are a few more ways to keep 
robots with electronic brains busy. 

28 

NIK(-Z£US 
KADAt 

NIICt-ZEUS 
LAUNCH 

Computers are the "heart element" of the North 
American Air Defense Command. 

human being could possibly work with 
the speed and accuracy required by this 
complex operation. 

Computers are also the "heart ele- 
ment" of the North American Air 
Defense Command. These computers 
evaluate the great amount of informa- 
tion represented by the flight paths of 
all the airplanes in the air at one time 
over the United States and Canada. 
Working hand in hand with the radar 
system, they keep the military services 
informed by immediately identifying all 
planes and rockets that are in flight. 
This, of course, reduces the chances of 
an attack by hostile aircraft and rockets. 

How are computers 
valuable for 
national defence? 

Computers are the "brains" of the 

American de- 
fence system. A 
ballistics missile 
inflight, for exam- 
ple, must be in exactly the right position 
at the proper speed when its motor is 
turned off — an error of one foot per 
second in speed can cause a several mile 
miss at the point of impact. As the mis- 
sile leaves its launching pad, it sends 
radio signals back to the computer on 
the ground, informing it about changes 
in wind, temperature, effect of gravity, 
and many more important facts. The 
computer works out the effect of these 
varying factors and instantly flashes in- 
structions to keep the missile on its 
proper course. When it reaches its cor- 
rect speed, the computer turns off the 
motor and the missile coasts at about 
14,000 miles an hour to its target. No 

Computers for payroll register: This horizontal row 
of 132 electronically timed hammers taps paper- 
forms against an inked ribbon and a fast-moving 
endless chain of type in an output printer of a data 
processing system. It prints numbers and letters at o 
basic speed of 600 lines a minute and, if it is oper- 
ated to print numbers alone, can do it at a rate of 
1,285 lines a minute. 

29 

Computers perform numerous jobs 

in the field of 

How do business , ™. 

- . . business. They 

and industry ■* 
use computers? have freed em P lov - 

ees from the drudg- 
ery of the routine paper work of 
accounting, invoicing, calculating the 
taxes, making out pay cheques, keeping 
inventories, etc. Publishing companies 
use computers to keep track of maga- 
zine subscriptions. 

Business and industry also use com- 
puters to help in making decisions. For 
example, an oil company deciding 
where to build service stations, can feed 
a computer all the factors involved in 
thedecision, such as traffic flow, land and 
buildingcosts.Themachine will produce 
adecisionor the alternate decisions most 
worthy of investigation. 

Computers are keeping track of thou- 
sands of ships in 

How are computers . * *i j 

. . . . the Atlantic and 

used to aid sea ... 

and air travel? Paciflc oceans 

so that the 

various rescue services can rush 

help instantly if a ship is in dis- 
tress. Ship positions are stored on the 
machines* memory sections, enabling 
the rescue services to select the ves- 
sels nearest an emergency without 
changing the courses of other ships un- 
necessarily. 

To assist with the planning of airline 
flights, a computer prepares what might 
be called "a master flight plan" for each 
flight. Weather information, informa- 
tion as to the number of passengers, fuel 
loads, take-off and landing weights, and 
other data are fed into the machine. 
The computer then analyzes all data 
and calculates the ideal routes, alti- 
tudes, etc., in the terms of these condi- 
tions. In this way pilots have a "master 
plan'* to follow in their final flight plan- 
ning. Using this information, the air- 
line's captain and dispatcher determine 
the "final plan." 

Computers are also being installed in 
some of our giant jet aircraft. With the 
use of such planes, the margin of safety 
available to a pilot during a take-off 
has been decreased greatly. The amount 

30 

Computers handle nu- 
merous jobs to ease the 
drudgery of officework, 
in aiding the safety of 
sea and air travel, and 
In giving help to the 
medical science and 
other fields. 

of power and the increased speed re- 
quirements of take-off have greatly 
reduced the time available for the pilot 
to study his take-off progress and to 
make his decisions. Thus, the computer 
on board, with its lightning action, can 
be very valuable to the pilot during this 
critical operation. 

The role of the computer in the hospital 

of the future can 

How can computers ... ~ 

j . 0 be a big one. For 

help our doctors? . 

instance, the 
computer can store and interpret medi- 
cal knowledge gathered within the past 
50 years. Medical science has collected 
a tremendous amount and complexity of 
published information. Most of this is 
doomed to storage on some dusty 
library shelf unless a method more rapid 
than human skill can make it available 
for quick reference. By using a central- 
ized electronic brain to store existing 
knowledge on disease symptoms and 
treatment, a doctor can "feed" the 
symptoms into the computer and await 
an answer advising treatment. Regard- 

Would you believe it, when you saw it in a science 
fiction picture? The data transmission unit above 
enables computers to hold direct two-way telegraph 
or telephone "conversations." Or, to put it a little 
more specifically: the computer can send business or 
scientific information any distance directly from its 
magnetic memory to the storage of another com- 
puter. Here the operator dials the office across the 
country to make a connection for data transmission. 

31 

less of the powers of these machines, 
however, doctors still will be a very 
necessary part of the medical diagnosis. 
Some patients and some diseases just do 
not respond to impersonal treatment 
from either a doctor or a machine. This 
human need for personal contact is 
what makes the practice of medicine an 
art as well as a profession. 

Each year, millions of reports on scien- 
tific research are 
How does a published _ a large 
computer become r , 

a translator? percentage of them 
in foreign lan- 
guages. In this mass of Russian, Ger- 
man, Dutch, and Italian data are clues to 
interplanetary flight, H-power, longer- 

wearing car tyres, more powerful bat- 
teries. The trouble is that too few of 
our scientists and engineers read foreign 
languages. To overcome this difficulty, 
computers have been put to work trans- 
lating these scientific publications. 

To do translations, every word in a 
sizable English dictionary is listed on 
tape under a code number or address. 
The French, German, or Russian equiv- 
alents for each word are given the same 
number or address. Then, to translate 
from French to English, for example, a 
tape with the French code numbers is 
fed into the machine, which matches 
the numbers and prints out the English. 
Some human editing to rearrange awk- 
ward word sequences is needed, but a 

The electronic brain* have made another dent In the 
"language barrier." Here (at left) sentences In Russian 
are punched Into cards that will bo ted Into an electronic 
data processing machine for translation into English. 
The card (below) is punched with a sample Russian 
language sentence (as interpreted at the top ol the 
card) In standard punched-card code. It is then ac- 
cepted by the computer, converted into its own binary 
language and translated by means of stored dictionary 
programmes Into the English language equivalent, which 
Is then printed. 

KACHYESTVO 

UGLYA OPRYEOYCO' flYETSYO KALOBYIYHOSTJYU 

III 1 

II II 1 

III II 

1 1 

1 III 1 

1 III II 1 

i iii nun i i i i 

1 III IIIIIIII 1 1 II lllllll 

1 

1 

III 1 

i i 

1 1 1 

i i 

1 1 

1 1 1 

1 1 

1 

i i 

1 1 

1 1 

i 

1 

1 1 

1 1 

JJ ii 

1 III 

II III 

1 

1 1 

THE QUALITY 

OF COAL 

IS DETERMINED BY 

CALORY" CONTENT 

Above, specimen punched-card and, below it, a strip with tramlation. 

32 

The match made by a computer on a television pro- 
gram was not one of the "robots" big successes. 

computer can make over a thousand 
translations in a day. 

Computers are helping to break lan- 
guage barriers in other ways. Compu- 
ters, for example, are rapidly translating 
English text into Braille in order to 
speed the production of reading mate- 
rial for the blind. Recently, an ex- 
tremely accurate and thorough Biblical 
Concordance was produced by a com- 
puter, which "read" the whole Bible 
through, sorted and cross-indexed se- 
lected key words, and printed out the 
results automatically — an entire book 
written by the computing system. 

A computer, of course, gives wrong 

answers if given 

Does an electronic . f 

. ... wrong lnforma- 

brain ever tail? ° 

tion. One experi- 
ment with the decision-making ability 

of computers was a failure. A television 
quiz program used a computer to select 
the ideal wife for a contestant. To ac- 
complish this, the programmer fed into 
the machine all facts known for a per- 
fect marriage — likes and dislikes, 
interests in various hobbies, films, 
music, food, etc. When the computer 
compared the qualifications of many 
women with those of the male contes- 
tant, it recommended one as ideal. But, 
when the two got to know each other, 
they decided they were mismatched and 
should not marry each other. Whose 
fault was this? The machine program- 
mer's? Perhaps it only proves that even 
a computer cannot understand a 
woman's mind. 

33 

The Learning Machine 

A science fiction story of some years back concerned a robot that 
revolted against its human masters and refused to work. The reason, 
eventually discovered, was that the machine did not like being turned 
off each night — in effect, killed — as a reward for its hard day's labours. 
So after that, the electric wall plug was left in all the time and both the 
robot and men hummed along merrily forever after. 

Can a robot 
learn? 

As you have read, there is no machine 
that can "think." But, 
there are robots that 
are capable of learn- 
ing. Learning, as we know it, is the 
process by which knowledge or a skill 
is acquired, a process which requires 
attention and direction of efforts. It is 
often a trial-and-error method. A 
teacher can speed up the learning proc- 
ess by directing the learning effort and 
thereby decreasing the number of trials. 
The learning machine matches many of 
the characteristics exhibited by the 
human learning process. For instance, 
the learning process in man is known to 
require repetition in order to effect the 

storage of new ideas. Remember when 
you learned the alphabet? You did so 
by repeating A, B, C, D, E, F . . . time 
and time again until you learned the 
complete alphabet correctly. This pro- 
cedure of repetition is necessary for the 
learning machine to "learn," too. 

How does the 
learning machine 
"learn?" 

The learning robot is not a computer 

and is not de- 
signed to work on 
speedy calcula- 
tions or work log- 
ically from step-by-step formulas fed in 
by programmers. Instead, it tackles 
problems for which no formula is 
known. It works out its own method of 

The "robot-secretory" — the 
computer at left is designed to 
recognize oil American speech 
sounds and, when spoken to 
through a microphone, type 
out what it ha* "heard." 

The learning machine above, if it does nor calch on to new lessons, has 
its "goof* button pushed for "punishment." This causes the machine to 
re-evaluate decisions and change the "memory." The tapes in the back- 
ground contain lessons on various subjects, including the quite complicated 
analysis of sonar and cardiograms. 

35 

attack, supplies the answer, and can 
explain how it arrived at the answer. 

The learning machine works by trial 
and error. Like a human, it relates new 
situations to its past "experiences," get- 
ting cleverer all the time in problem 
solving. Also like people, it learns 
through pain and pleasure. (When you 
were younger, you learned by experi- 
ence not to touch a hot stove by the 
"pain" of a burn and learned the reward 
of doing something correctly by the 
"pleasure" of receiving sweets or being 
praised.) When the machine makes a 
mistake, its human teacher pushes a 
"goof" button, forcing it to do 
lem over. As a "reward," it is 

to ojerate uninterrupted. 

hi i 

While it is difficult for a human operator to dis- 
tinguish between the blips caused by an airplane 
and those caused by birds, the learning machine, 
when once taught, will function flawlessly. 

How are learning 
machines used? 

The learning machine has proved its 

worth in analyz- 
ing cardiograms 
— electronic trac- 
ings of heartbeats — and radar echoes. 
In the latter example, a critical problem 
is the need to train radar operators to 
tell the difference between true target 
echoes and false ones. Thus, a coastal 
defence radar station needs to be able 
to distinguish instantly an enemy plane 
or rocket from a flock of homecoming 
seagulls. Normally it takes months for 
a human to acquire the skill to tell what 
the different "blips" on the radar screen 
mean. But the learning machine can 
be taught the job in a very brief time 
and will perform like a veteran. 

A very simple application for this 
robot would be to teach it to sort ap- 
ples. First, the machine would be taught 
in much the same way as the beginning 
apple sorter just hired. The drawing on 
this page shows the parts of the device. 

36 

■ 

The apples pass by the scanners (they 
work much like television cameras) on 
a moving belt where the information 
as to redness, softness, size, etc., is 
changed into electrical signals that are 
fed into an invariance unit whose job it 
is to arrange these signals and informa- 

The opple-iorling machine, once properly taught, 
will perform to utter perfection. 

tion. (The invariance unit is used, 
where possible, to lessen the data han- 
dling load of the learning machine.) 
The apples are to be sorted into those 
for eating and those for apple sauce. As 
each apple is scanned, the learning ma- 
chine takes action and dumps it either 
into the "eating" or "sauce" bins. 

An expert apple sorter in this case is 
a "teacher" until the robot learns his 
lessons well. Every time the machine 
makes a mistake he presses the "goof 
button and the machine has to change 
its "memory" slightly to take that fact 
into consideration and correct its future 
action. After each error, the machine 
gets a little better at the task of sorting 
apples and after a short time, becomes 
almost perfect. The learning machine 
has many other uses in factories, too. 

The Teaching Machine 

Machines play chess, compose beautiful music, do difficult 
mathematical problems, and have shown that they can learn from 
experience. We also have machines that teach. 

If your school does not already have 

teaching ma- 

What does a teachinq 

. .,„ , chines, you 

machine look like? ' / 

may not have 
seen one. These robots are rather simple 
looking and quite harmless. In most 

THE TEACHING MACHINE 
(TMI-GIOUER'S Ml N./ MAX.' 

cases, they are just metal or plastic you have a clean paper area to write 
boxes with two windows in them, and a on again, 
few knobs or pushbuttons here and 

windows. Then you write your answer chine to learn. The programmer (your 
on the paper exposed by a small window teacher) puts a programme (your lesson) 
near the top of the machine. When you into the machine (the input) and you 
press the button again to get the correct (like the computer) process the ma- 
answer, a shield covers your answer, terial. You study the question, reach 
making it impossible to change it. into your memory element, and come 
Now, press the button again to get out with the correct answer — you 
your next question. As it appears, your hope. This, like the computer, is your 
answer to the previous question slides output. 

out of view, the shield disappears, and By having the lesson fed to you rather 

To operate most teaching machines, 
you press a button and it brings your 
first question into view in one of the 

there. 

slowly and well-planned, you learn by 
trial and error, just like a machine. If 
you make a mistake, the teacher pushes 
tne "goof ' button, but, unlike a ma- 
chine, your punishment may be to stay 
after school. 

Close-up of Ihe part of the teaching machine 
thai contains the question and at the lower 
righthand corner your answer. On the illut- 

Teaching machines will not replace 

teachers. But', pro- 
lan machines . . 
replace teachers? ^rammed learn- 
ing, as this type of 
teaching is called, will help the teacher 
to teach better. These machines will also 

help to solve the teacher shortage by 
allowing larger classes. Since pupils us- 
ing these devices require little super- 
vision from the teacher, she has more 
time to give special help or to do other 
classroom tasks. 

Robots Take Over 

Robots and computers, as we have seen, are taking over more and 
more jobs formerly done by man. True, men can still do everything that 
these machines can do. But it takes a thousand men working a lifetime to 
compute what the latest electronic brain can do in a day. 

No book on robots and computers 
would be complete 
without mentioning the 
word automation. Gen- 
erally speaking, this term refers to a 
combination of machines and electronic 

What is 
automation? 

devices that handle certain rapid servi- 
ces or the mass production of goods. 
Because modern computers are self- 
regulating, they can be used to control 
assembly-line production electronically. 
They can also be used to perform other 
factory jobs and run machinery. 

What is 
feedback? 

To have automation, we must have ma- 
chines and processes that 
regulate themselves. To 
do this, feedback is 
needed. Feedback provides a means by 
which information concerning a ma- 
chine's operation is continuously fed 
back to the machine and compared with 
the desired results. 

One feedback device that we all are 
familiar with is the thermostat found 
in home heating systems. Let us assume 
that the thermostat is set at 72 degrees. 
When the temperature in the room is 
lower than 72 degrees, the thermostat 
feeds back this information to the boi- 
ler. The boiler then turns on auto- 

One operator on Ihe control panel can work 
the complicated operation of this steel plant. 

The working of the thermostat (s a typical example of 
closed control, or an operation with feedback. The three 
components HEATING — ROOM TEMPERATURE - 
THERMOSTAT are connected in such a way, that any 
change In one component causes a change In ihe other 
component You will easily understand how Important 
this Is If you visualize the same example with no feed- 
back, with open control: You could have a circuit where 
the outside temperature causes the start and closing 
ol the boiler. In this case, the thermometer outside "in- 
forms" the thermostat of the temperature. The thermo- 
stat Just as before, will start the boiler when the outside 
temperature reaches a certain point, and it will turn of 
the boiler when the outside temperature has reached 
a certain degree above the starting point. Th* actual 
room temperature however, wilt not be fed back to the 
thermostat. This means: If It to cold outs-de tor a few 
weeks, the boiler will work, even if you are roasting In 
the room. 

CLOSED CONTROL 

OPEN CONTROL 

OUTDOOR 
TEMPERATURE 

matically. It remains on until the 
thermostat feeds back the information 
that the room temperature has reached 
72 degrees. This turns the boiler off. 
Since this process goes on continuously, 
it is called closed control. Today, the 
electronic computer is the "brains" of 
most automation operations. It feeds 
back information to the machines that 
do the work just as the thermostat feeds 
back the temperature data to the boi- 
ler in our heating systems. 

TMERM05TAI 

ROOM 

TEMPERATURE 

Does automation put 
people out of work? 

While automation may do away with 

many u n - 
s k i 1 l*e d or 
semi-skilled 
jobs, it will provide many new work 
opportunities. The age of automation 
will need highly trained workers who 
can maintain and repair automaticma- 

40 

chines. It will also make new professions 
such as computer operators and pro- 
grammers. Industry forecasters predict 
that 170,000 computer programmers 
will be needed in the next 10 years. 

The era of robots and electronic 
brains, like the machine age before it, 
should bring increased leisure and 

We use the word "thermostat" so easily, and we talk 
about how Intricate Its operations are, but do you know 
how It actually works? — It la a thermometer ot sorts 
In the first place. Based on the fact that different metals 
expand and contract at different temperatures, most 
thermostats have, as the Illustration shows you. a curved 
motal strip which consists of copper on one sldo and 
chromium steel on the other side. The strip curls ovor 
In ono direction when the temperature rises, and In the 
othor direction when the temperature falls, bocause of 
the fact that copper and steel react differently to the 
change of temperature. The curling In one direction 
will close a circuit and throw a switch that will start the 
boiler. The moving In the other direction will break the 
circuit and throw the switch to stop the boiler. 

higher standards of living for all. This 
means more people will be needed as 
teachers, librarians, hotel keepers, road 
builders. How can you prepare for these 
far-reaching efEects? The answer is not 
new. The answer is to stay in school 
as long as you can and learn as much 
as possible while you are there. 

Automation in Action 

In our world of speed and advanced technology, automation is no 
longer just the most modern or money-saving way to do a job. In many 
instances, it is fast becoming the only practical way that jobs can be done. 

Computers and robots' mechanical 

hands are essen- 
How is . tial to our coun- 

automation used . . 

in communications? tr V s telephone 

communication 

system. In former times, it was nec- 
essary to place telephone calls with 
an operator who, in turn, had to con- 
tact the person you were calling. This 
sometimes took a great deal of time. 
But now, with the help of these ma- 
chines, a large number of British tele- 
phone subscribers can dial long distance 
numbers directly. Message accounting 
tapes make it possible to record auto- 
matically the time of a call, how long it 
lasted, the calling number and the num- 
ber called. 

Without automation, our telephone 
system would probably break down. 
Even if the Post Office could find 
enough operators — and they probably 
could not — the cost of a phone would 
be so high that most families could not 
afford one. 

Other forms of communication such 
as radio are using automation devices to 
speed up their services. The Post Office 
is increasing the installation of machines 
to handle the millions of letters which 
are posted every day. 

The first subway train 
without a driver had Its 
tryout not long ago in 
Now York City. 

How is 

automation used 
in transportation? 

If you were to travel a great deal, es- 
pecially by air- 
lines, you would 
know of the mad- 
dening mixups 
and delays that can occur in getting a 
reservation aboard an airplane. Once 
you know how the system works, it is 
not difficult to see how this could occur. 

If you walk into an airline ticket office 
anywhere in the United States and de- 
sire a seat on a plane from New York 
to London leaving at 6:30 PM on 
March 19th, how does a ticket agent 
know if a seat is available? The manual 
procedure for finding out is rather awk- 
ward. The agent has to call a central 
reservation office, where the available 
seats are recorded on a large black- 
board. If there is a seat available, he 
makes the sale and informs the person 
in charge of inventory control, who then 
changes the blackboard's figures. Any- 
one who has ever been left holding the 
bag because 89 seats were sold on a 88- 
seat plane found out that this system is 
not entirely reliable. 

With more than 50 million people 
a year using scheduled airlanes, auto- 
mation is becoming essential to a speedy 
management of plane reservations. Most 

American Airlines Magnetronic Reservisor enables 'he reservation agent to obtain immediately all data on 
requested flight reservations ond even a number of possibilities for alternate suggestions. 

of the major airlanes are already using 
special purpose computers to do the job 
or are planning to install them. 

Simply, the automatic reservation 
system consists of a boxlike device con- 
nected to a central memory unit that 
transmits and records flight informa- 
tion. By placing a metal plate into the 
box and pushing a couple of buttons, 
the ticket agent can get swift and ac- 
curate information about seat reserva- 
tions. The box is even equipped with a 
lamp that flashes on if the electronic 
brain decides that the human brain is 
processing the question incorrectly. 

The bus lines and railways are also 
using similar ticket reservation systems. 
Some railway and underground lines 
are now replacing human drivers with 
automatic robot engine-drivers. 

Automatic controls have largely re- 
placed men in 

How is automation . . , 

i . . . . - various mdus- 

used in industry? 

tries in which a 
break in the flow of production would 
ruin the product. Petroleum and chemi- 
cal plants are now completely auto- 
matic, from the basic raw materials to 
final packaging for shipment. A small 
group of engineers is still required to 
check the operation from a central con- 
trol room. 

The need for faster, cheaper produc- 
tion in modern mass industry has 
created the greatest demand for auto- 
mation. Even the production of compli- 
cated high-precision items can be done 
by automated machines, in one smooth 
and continuous operation. Some indus- 
tries, such as those using atomic energy. 

When people hear what the "Ice Cream Robot" can 
do, they may picture something like the illustration 
at the right. Actually, the robot is handling all of 
the operations, only it does not look like o tin man, 
but like a calculating machine. 

must use automatic machinery because 
humans cannot work too near the nu- 
clear reactors on account of the dan- 
gerous radiations that accompany the 
splitting of atoms. 

Many automatic robot devices are 
now so common in our everyday lives 
that few people even take notice of 

The automatic control 
<^J equipment belongs 
to an analogue computer 
for the world's first fully 
automatic system for 
making ice cream mix. It 
calculates ice cream for- 
mulae and converts the in- 
formation to coded punch 
cards. These in turn are 
translated through a 
batch-blending system to 
direct the flow of raw 
products from storage to 
blending tanks. Wouldn't 
it be a shame if the 
"robot" would develop a 
taste for ice cream and 
eat it up before it reaches 
you? 

r w 

them. Public buildings have self-service 
lifts; some of these even use tape- 
recorded messages to instruct passen- 
gers who hold up their progress. Central 
heating, automatically regulated by the 
thermostat, is another example. 

44 

The underwater MOflOT can function much bet- 
ter than human beings at great undersea depth. 

During the past decade there has been 

Can robots do ? Cre3Sed mtereSt 
tasks that man m ^ Sea aS an ' m ' 

can not do? portant area for mili- 
tary expansion and 
as a source for food and raw materials. 
Thus, a growing need for performing 
complex underwater operations is being 
generated. Typical of the operations 
which can be performed by properly 
selected robot units are: 

Installation and adjustment of under- 
water detection devices. 
Operation, inspection and mainte- 
nance of submerged equipment. 
Exploration and sampling the ocean 
environment. 

Location and recovery of objects lost 
in the oceans. 

Underwater operations associated 
with oil well completion. 

Underwater mining operations. 

Underwater construction operations. 

Attaching lines, clevises, slings, etc., 
to underwater objects. 

Underwater geological and scientific 
explorations. 

Underwater farming. 

As shown in the illustrations here, 
Mobot can be adopted to many of these 
undersea jobs. This robot can see, it 
can hear, it can feel, it can operate drills, 
cutting torches, wrenches and other 
special tools; it will proceed to a specific 
destination, report to its operator, per- 
form its functions, deal with emergen- 
cies, carry out alternate decisions — all 

45 

Telemetry control panel is used to control the under- 
water Mobol on page 45. 

at the command of the operator on 
board a surface vessel. 

Telemetry is the term given to the 
* • process of detecting and 

What is , . . 

telemetry? S atnenn g information at 
one location and relay- 
ing it to another spot automatically. 
Many common devices that we see 
everyday employ telemetry. For ex- 
ample, the temperature gauge on the 
dashboard of an automobile tells the 
driver, sitting in the car's front seat, 
about the temperature in a different lo- 
cation — inside the car's engine. When 
mechanical robots are used for tele- 
meter purposes, in addition to gather- 
ing data, they can also do actual work. 
We are now employing them for both 
undersea and outer space tasks. 

How far 
con we go? 

Any man would be bold indeed to at- 
tempt to spell out today 
what robots and elec- 
tronic brains may some 
day accomplish. There can scarcely be 
any doubt, however, that machines are 
doing more and more things better than 
people. We have long since become 
used to that fact, especially when it 
comes to machines that supply physical 
muscle; a man with a shovel is no match 
for a bulldozer in an earth-moving con- 
test. We are beginning, too, to realize 
that man can be equally outclassed by 
machines that supply power ordinarily 
considered unique to the human brain; 
an electronic computer may complete 
a problem in an hour or two that it 
would take a mathematician years to 
solve with paper and pencil. 

But we must remember that a ma- 
chine can only do what it is specifically 
programmed to do. At best, it can never 
do more than that; it may do less, if it 
blows a fuse or runs out of petrol. When 
it comes to judgment, common sense, or 
whatever you want to call it, the ma- 
chine is out of the running. 

It is not by some coincidence that 
people can do things that machines 
cannot do, and vice versa. It is, of 
course, the reason that man made the 
machines in the first place. He harnessed 
power to extend his strength and de- 
vised automatic controls to rid himself 
of undesirable, repetitive tasks. 

As technological progress continues 
in the future, presumably machines will 
continue to do more and more of our 
chores, but only as the tools of the hu- 
man beings that use them. The ma- 

46 

chines will supply brawn and brain 
muscle; people will supply the intelli- 
gence, foresight, tact, drive, and other 
human qualities needed to run a busi- 
ness. 

Science fiction stories and horror 

comics notwithstanding, machines are 
not going to take over the world. In the 
business world, machines without peo- 
ple are as worthless and helpless as a 
hammer or screwdriver is when there is 
no hand to guide it. 

Computer Talk 

ACCESS TIME, The time it takes your computer 
to find a fact in its memory storage . . . also the 
time to find the spot to store it in the first place. 

ADDRESS (noun). A designation - numbers, 
letters, or both - that indicates where a specific 
piece of information can be found in the memory 
storage. 

ADDRESS (verb). To call a specific piece of 
information from the memory, or to put it in. 

ANALOG COMPUTER. A computer (or calcu- 
lating device) that operates by translating num- 
bers into measurable quantities such as voltages, 
resistances, rotations, or vice versa. 

ARITHMETIC SECTION. This is the part of the 
processing unit that does the adding, subtracting, 
multiplying, dividing, and makes the logical 
decisions. 

BINARY DIGITS. The kind of numbers that com- 
puters use internally. There are only two binary 
digits, 1 and 0, otherwise known as "on" and 
"off." 

CHANNEL. One-way traffic roads for the flow of 
information bit-by-bit, or word-by-word, either 
into the computer or to and from the storage. 

CODING (noun). A system of symbols and rules 
that tell the computer how to handle informa- 
tion . . . where to get it, what to do with it, 
where to put it, where to go for the next step, 
etc. (See Programme.) 

COMMON LANGUAGE. A technique that re- 
duces all information to a form that is in- 
telligible to the units in a data-processing 
system. This enables the units of the computer 
to "talk" to one another. 

COMPARE. To check information - alphabetical, 
numerical or symbolic — against ostensibly re- 
lated information in order to determine whether 
it is identical, larger or smaller, or in sequence. 

COMPUTER WORD. A series of V$ and 0's 
that are grouped into units. These words are 
intelligible to the computer and represent alpha- 
betic, numeric and special characters. 

CONTROL SECTION. Nerve centre of the 
electronic brain. It prescribes a chain of instruc- 
tions la programme) for every bundle of facts 
that enters the system. It can send for stored data 
when u is needed during the programme. It can 
exa mine the results of any step to select the 
following step or steps. When one bundle of 
facts has been processed, the control section 
usually issues orders to start all over again with 
the next one. 

DATA REDUCTION. The computer job of bring- 
ing large masses of raw data down to its simplest 
form, and organizing it in an ordered and use- 
ful manner. 

DIGITAL COMPUTER. A computer (or calcu- 
lating device) that operates by using numbers 
to express all the quantities and variables of a 
problem. In most digital computers, the num- 
bers, in turn, are expressed by electrical or 
electronic impulses. 

INPUT. Computer fodder in the form of bundles 
of new facts. 

INPUT-OUTPUT DEVICE. A unit that accepts 
new data, sends it into the computer for proc- 
essing, receives the results and converts them 
into a usable form, like payroll cheques, or bills. 

INPUT STORAGE. First stop for incoming in- 
formation. Picks it up so that bundles of 
information can get into the system without 
waiting for the previous ones to come out the 
other end. Enables consecutive bundles to be 
compared with each other. 

INTERMEDIATE STORAGE. A son of elec- 
tronic scratch pad. As input is turned into 

47 

output, it usually goes through a series of 
changes. The intermediate memory storage 
holds each of the successive changes just as long 
as it is needed. 

INQUIRY UNIT. A device used to 'talk" to the 
computer, usually to get quick answers to ran- 
dom questions like, "How many hammers do 
we have in stock?" or "When did we last order 
soap powder and in what quantity?" 

INSTRUCTION. A coded programme step that 
tells the computer what to do for a single opera- 
lion in a programme. 

LOGICAL CHOICE. Making the correct deci- 
sions where alternatives or even a variety of 
possibilities arc open . . . whether to debit or 
credit . . . whether or not to issue a replacement 
order. 

MEMORY STORAGE. The computer's filing 
system. It holds standard or current facts such 
as rate tables, current inventories, balances, 
etc., and sometimes programming instructions. 
The memory storage can be internal, that is, 
a part of the computer itself, such as drums, 
cores or thin-film. It can also be external such 
as paper tape, magnetic tape or punched cards. 

MAGNETIC CORE STORAGE. A type of com- 
puter storage that employs a core of magnetic 
material, wound around with wire. The core 
can be charged to represent a binary I or 0. 
It provides for very fast access to and from 
system storage. 

MAGNETIC DRUM STORAGE. A metal cyl- 
inder, with a sensitized surface, which spins 
inside a jacket with 
address of every bit^^Hta an the dr 
known, so it is merely 3 maiter of dropping it 
into its "cubbyhole" or fishing it out as i: 
under the right head. 

MAGNETIC TAPE STORAGE. Reels of metallic 
or plastic tape with sensitized surface. Much 
like paper tape, except :j( ftunchin 

a hole, you charge up a spot. Data can be read, 
erased, entered or replaced by recording heads. 
Data is usually entered in sequence so that your 
computer handles the facts in logical order at 
breakneck speed. 

OUTPUT. Computer results such as answers to 
mathematical problems, statistical, analytical or 
accounting figures, production schedules . . . 
whatever you may desire. 

OUTPUT DEVICE. The unit that translates com- 
puter results into usable or final form. (See 
Input-Output Device) 

PRINTER. An output device for spelling out com- 
puter results as numbers, words or symbols. 

PROCESSING SECTION. The unit that docs the 
actual changing of input into output . . . includes 
arithmetic section and intermediate storage. 

PROGRAMME (noun). A set of instructions or 
steps that tells the computer exactly how to 
handle a complete problem — whatever it is. 
Most programmes include alternate steps or rou- 
tines to take care of variations. Generally, pro- 
gramme steps form a complete cycle. Each 
incoming bundle of facts (unit of information) 
sets off the whole cycle from start to finish; the 
succeeding unit sets it off again and so forth. 

PROGRAMME (verb). To plan the whole opera- 
tion from input to output and set the control 
section to handle it. 

PROGRAMMER. Person who arranges the pro- 
gram. 

REAL-TIME. A method of processing data so 
fast that there is virtually no passage of time 

E 

REGIS I F.R. A device in which information is 

placed for storage or other purposes. 
STORED PROGRAMME. A set of instruction! in 
the memory section that cm run the computer 
of cut/in to take over from the regular programme 
en) the occasion arises. Often used for alter- 
outinesa 