Provocative Thinking and Making

Welcome to the School of the Art Institute of Chicago (SAIC), one of the most historically significant accredited independent schools of art and design in the nation located in one of the greatest American cities. Our accolades are many, including recognition by Columbia University’s National Arts Journalism survey as “the most influential art college in the United States” and our consistent ranking among the top three graduate fine arts programs in the nation by U.S. News and World Report.

SAIC is distinct in the way that it provides graduate, post-baccalaureate, and undergraduate students an interdisciplinary curriculum and the necessary freedom to develop as artists, designers, and scholars. At the same time, we strive for a level of rigor, investigation, and cultural relevance that makes SAIC truly special. Our students translate the most complex ideas into tangible forms—paintings, sculptures, films, performances, books, installations, inventions, buildings, community projects, and, more often than not, a combination of the above. Few schools in the United States provide such a broad range of possibilities.

Our engaged student body and award-winning faculty of artists, scholars, and leading practitioners work in close proximity, sharing exceptional resources and establishing a forum for a vigorous exchange of ideas. The heralded new Modern Wing of the Art Institute provides an incredible resource for inspiration and study. Other unique SAIC resources include our cutting-edge facilities, Gene Siskel Film Center, Visiting Artists Program, and Sullivan Galleries that exhibit work to a wide audience.

Of course, downtown Chicago gives our students access to one of the world’s most creatively vibrant and architecturally rich cities, and we encourage engagement in its full spectrum of cultural amenities. However, we fully recognize that we live in a globalized society—reflected also in the demographic make-up of our student body—and thus provide a wealth of invaluable international study opportunities across the globe.

Foremost, SAIC is about students. We are dedicated to providing a complete liberal arts as well as the arts and design education that will serve our alumni throughout their multifaceted careers. We are delighted by your interest and sincerely hope that you will add your voice to the SAIC dialogue at such a critical point in the history of Chicago, the nation, and the world.

About SAIC

A leader in educating artists, designers, and scholars since 1866, the School of the Art Institute of Chicago (SAIC) offers nationally accredited undergraduate, graduate, and post-baccalaureate programs to more than 3,500 students from around the globe. Located in the heart of Chicago, SAIC has an educational philosophy built upon an interdisciplinary approach to art and design, giving students unparalleled opportunities to develop their creative and critical abilities, while working with renowned faculty who include many of the leading practitioners in their fields.

SAIC is one of the oldest accredited independent schools of art and design in the country.

Founded as the Chicago Academy of Design in 1866, the School of the Art Institute of Chicago (SAIC) provides a challenging education in the studio arts and exhibition opportunities for its students. The school incorporated as the Chicago Academy of Fine Art in 1879, and changed its name to the Art Institute of Chicago in 1882. The museum and school moved into a building designed and built for the World's Columbian Exposition in 1893.

Throughout the history of SAIC, alumni have played central roles in important art movements. It was SAIC that provided the impetus for two significant schools of American painting—the Regionalists of the 1930s, and the Imagists of the 1960s. Some of the most notable names in the arts received their early training at SAIC, including Georgia O’Keeffe, Claes Oldenburg, H.C. Westermann, Thomas Hart Benton, Grant Wood, Ivan Albright, Ed Paschke, Roger Brown, Halston, LeRoy Neiman, Elizabeth Murray, Cynthia Rowley, David Sedaris, Rirkrit Tiravanija, and Sarah Vowell.

SAIC has the largest school-museum campus in the United States.

Since 1976, SAIC has occupied its own cutting-edge facilities adjoining the museum and the heralded Modern Wing overlooking Grant Park and Lake Michigan with additional buildings throughout an urban campus at the heart of the Chicago Loop.

SAIC Today: Art and Design in the 21st Century

The School of the Art Institute of Chicago is one of the largest accredited independent schools of art and design in the country. Providing degrees at the undergraduate, post-baccalaureate, and graduate levels, SAIC offers a broad and dynamic spectrum of study, including Art and Technology Studies; Arts Administration and Policy; Art History, Theory, and Criticism; Art Education and Art Therapy; Fashion Design; Film, Video, New Media, and Animation; Architecture, Historic Preservation, and Interior Architecture; Ceramics; Fiber and Material Studies; Painting and Drawing; Performance; Photography; Printmaking; Sculpture; Sound; Visual Communication; Visual and Critical Studies; and Writing. A comprehensive program in Liberal Arts emphasizes the critical role that humanities, mathematics, and sciences play in artists' development.

Founded in 1877, Rhode Island School of Design (or “RIZ-dee” for the acronym RISD) is one of the oldest and best-known colleges of art and design in the U.S. Each year approximately 2,300 students from around the world pursue a creative, studio-based education at RISD, which offers rigorous bachelor’s and master’s degree programs in 19 architecture, design, fine arts and art education majors. The college is located in Providence, Rhode Island, which offers its own vibrant art scene and is conveniently located between two other major cultural centers: Boston and New York.

From its incorporation on March 22, 1877, Rhode Island School of Design has stood out as a leader in art and design education, attracting extraordinary people who thrive in its creative culture. As one of the first colleges of its kind in the country – founded simultaneously with the RISD Museum of Art – it has always been something of a maverick.

RISD was founded and nurtured by women – more than 40 years before women in America even gained the right to vote. In 1877, the 34 members of the Rhode Island Women’s Centennial Commission voted to invest their group’s surplus funding of $1,675 in founding Rhode Island School of Design. In doing so, they not only embarked on a radical experiment, but set the school's tone for challenging assumptions that continues to this day.

The mission of Rhode Island School of Design, through its college and museum, is to educate its students and the public in the creation and appreciation of works of art and design, to discover and transmit knowledge and to make lasting contributions to a global society through critical thinking, scholarship and innovation.

Original Mission Statement

On March 22, 1877, the Rhode Island General Assembly ratified “An Act to Incorporate the Rhode Island School of Design.” The corporation, comprised of a forward-thinking group of men and women, artists and business leaders, educators and politicians, was formed “for the purpose of aiding in the cultivation of the arts of design.” The original bylaws set forth the following key objectives for RISD:

First. The instruction of artisans in drawing, painting, modeling, and designing, that they may successfully apply the principles of Art to the requirements of trade and manufacture.

Second. The systematic training of students in the practice of Art, in order that they may understand its principles, give instruction to others, or become artists.

Third. The general advancement of public Art Education, by the exhibition of works of Art and of Art school studies, and by lectures on Art.

RISD recognizes diversity and inclusivity as fundamental to a creative community and integral to an art and design education. Just as the studio environment fosters curiosity, flexibility, empathy, imagination and progressive thinking, these are values the RISD community shares across the board. As a global community, RISD strives to:

• create and sustain inclusive perspectives and practices
• embrace and celebrate differences in its campus community
• attract, develop and retain a diverse population of students, faculty and staff
• engage with our ever-changing communities in meaningful ways

Ranked as America’s top college for students in the arts by Newsweek/The Daily Beast, California Institute of the Arts has set the pace for educating professional artists since 1970.

Offering rigorous undergraduate and graduate degree programs through six schools—Art, Critical Studies, Dance, Film/Video, Music, and Theater—CalArts has championed creative excellence, critical reflection, and the development of new forms and expressions.

As successive generations of faculty and alumni have helped shape the landscape of contemporary arts, the Institute first envisioned by Walt Disney encompasses a vibrant, eclectic community with global reach, inviting experimentation, independent inquiry, and active collaboration and exchange among artists, artistic disciplines and cultural traditions.

Admission to CalArts is competitive and considered mainly on the basis of demonstrated artistic merit, as assessed by the faculty of the individual programs. Other important considerations include educational records, recommendations, and artist’s statements by applicants.

Based in Valencia, north of Los Angeles, CalArts further extends its commitment to the arts through the Roy and Edna Disney/CalArts Theater (REDCAT) in downtown L.A. and the nationally emulated Community Arts Partnership (CAP) youth arts program.

CalArts teaches artists to develop the skills and personal drive to reach their creative potential, question received ideas and expand forms of knowledge and experience in the world. CalArts challenges artists to create work that matters globally to the state of culture today and in the future.

California Institute of the Arts was founded with the intent to bring different art forms together and allow them to cross-pollinate, in the process fostering collaboration and sparking innovation.

As an internationally recognized school for the performing and visual arts—film, theater, art, dance, music and writing—the CalArts artistic philosophy places an emphasis on an exploration of new paths beyond conventional boundaries.

The CalArts educational philosophy is based on close collegial interaction between teachers and students—in class, in production and in one-to-one mentoring. This approach combines rigorous instruction with individualized attention, a process that empowers students to define their own personal objectives—and to develop and refine their own distinctive artistic voices. Given more creative freedom than at traditional art schools and conservatories, our students, in turn, are self-motivated, passionate, and deeply committed to their work. They are accepted into CalArts primarily on the basis of their artistic ability; once here, they produce art from day one.

Today CalArts comprises three entities. First, is the educational and artistic program on campus. The second is REDCAT, our producing, presenting and exhibiting venue in downtown Los Angeles. The theater and gallery at REDCAT bring an eclectic mix of artists from throughout the world to Los Angeles. This state-of-the-art venue also features work by faculty and alumni. And third is CalArts’ Community Arts Partnership (CAP), a network of collaborative partnerships that links the Institute with more than 40 arts organizations in order to provide arts education to youth throughout greater Los Angeles. Teaching in CAP programs offers students the opportunity to acquire valuable teaching experience, to earn income, and to make a significant contribution to the lives of others.

CalArts is committed to providing a well-rounded education for students.
Careers in the Arts

Recent studies have shown the impact that the arts have in society and in developing the creative economy. For further reading:

• The Strategic National Arts Alumni Project (SNAAP), an annual online survey, data management and institutional improvement system that enhances the impact of arts-school education.
• An Otis Report on the Creative Economy of the Los Angeles Region

Courses

Through our Curating Your Own Life: Transitioning to a Career after CalArts program, students are exposed to a range of careers in the arts; opportunities to participate in career-related courses and internships; consultations with guest artists to gain familiarity with entrepreneurial approaches to their own work; and a Third Year Experience featuring career mentoring for all students. Our goal is to provide students with the tools to shape a career that fits their individual talents and ambitions.

• Arts Pedagogy: Artists Preparing to Teach in the Community
• Real World Survival Skills
• Getting Your Art Life Together (life after art school) (School of Art)
• NEXT! - Preparing for My Future in Dance (School of Dance)
• The Business of Film (School of Film/Video)
• Producing Your Thesis (School of Film/Video)
• Entrepreneurial Studies (School of Film/Video)
• Career Design for Musicians (School of Music)
• Adventures in Commissioning (School of Music)
• Entrepreneurship (School of Theater)
• The Law of Producing Theater (School of Theater)
• Arts Marketing and Grant Writing (School of Theater)

January interim courses provide students from most Schools with an array of compressed learning opportunities, including career-oriented workshops, practicums and international experiences.
Other Opportunities

• Internship opportunities are posted in the Internship Bank with a wide range of employers including artists, film studios, galleries, theaters, non-profit organizations, design studios and schools.
• National organizations such as Teach for America and National Association of Artist Organizations engage students, faculty, and staff. The Kauffman Foundation supported Entrepreneurship in the Arts conference was held at CalArts in 2007.
• Extensive visiting artist program includes a new series exploring topics around the theme “Thinking Small and the Economy of Being an Artist.” Alpert award-winning artists regularly participate as guest artists in schools and at REDCAT.
• During the school year, the Office of Student Affairs invites companies for on-campus presentations and recruiting. The Office also hosts workshops throughout the year that focus on resume and cover letter writing, legal issues in art, teaching, grant writing, budgeting and credit, tax preparation and time management.
• The Alumni Association presents casual lunchtime discussions with alumni in career-focused sessions, in addition to workshops on developing business skills applicable to the arts.
• International opportunities include academic and performance partnerships with organizations worldwide, including: Slade School of Art in London, Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama in Glasgow, Fringe Edinburgh Festival, Maison de la France and the Cultural Services of the French Consulate in Los Angeles, theater projects in Rwanda and Uganda, and Center for New Performance productions in England, France and Australia.

More information on career resources offered by the Student Affairs Office

The School of Art offers professional instruction in four interrelated areas of study: graphic design, painting/printmaking, photography, and sculpture.

Artists and designers of unusual promise and strong motivation are provided an educational context in which they can explore the potential of their own talents in the midst of an intense critical dialogue. This dialogue is generated by their peers, by distinguished visitors, and by a faculty comprised of professional artists of acknowledged accomplishment.

The graduate student’s primary educational experience at Yale is centered on his or her own studio activity. Supporting this enterprise are the experience, knowledge, and skills gained from rigorous, structured courses such as drawing, filmmaking, the relativity of color, and the rich academic offerings found throughout Yale. Each student is routinely exposed to many aesthetic positions through encounters with faculty members and visitors. The School is devoted not only to the refinement of visual skills, but to the cultivation of the mind. Students must bring creative force and imagination to their own development, for these qualities cannot be taught—they can only be stimulated and appreciated.

The School of Art offers an undergraduate art major for students in Yale College (see the bulletin Yale College Programs of Study). In addition, the School’s courses are open to students in the Graduate School and other professional schools of the University, and School of Art students may enroll in elective courses in the Graduate School and other professional schools as well as in the College with permission.

Master of Fine Arts Degree

The degree of Master of Fine Arts is the only degree offered by the School of Art. It is conferred by the University upon recommendation of the faculty after successful completion of all course work in residence and after a thesis presentation that has been approved by the faculty. It implies distinctive achievement on the part of students in studies in the professional area of their choice and demonstrated capacity for independent work. The minimum residence requirement is two years. All candidates’ work is reviewed by faculty at the end of each term. If the work is not considered satisfactory, the student may not be invited back to complete the program (see section on Review and Awards under Academic Regulations). All degree candidates are expected to be present at the Commencement exercises in May unless excused by the dean.

Course work for the Master of Fine Arts degree carries a minimum of sixty credits. The disposition of these credits varies according to the area of study and is agreed upon at the time of registration between the student and his or her faculty adviser.

Lecture Program

Each department has its own visitors program in which professionals from outside the School are invited to lecture or take part in critiques. There is also an all-school lecture program in which ideas of general and cross-disciplinary importance are explored by visiting artists and members of the faculty.

Exhibitions

The School of Art’s Green Gallery, located at 1156 Chapel Street, provides a year-round forum for the exhibition of work by students, faculty, and special guests in the four graduate departments of the School and the undergraduate program. The gallery is usually open to the public daily from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. Information: 203.432.2605.

HISTORY OF THE SCHOOL

The study of the visual arts at Yale had its beginning with the opening, in 1832, of the Trumbull Gallery, one of the earliest art museums in the Anglo-Saxon world and the first (and long the only one) connected with a college in this country. It was founded by patriot-artist Colonel John Trumbull, one-time aide-de-camp to General Washington, with the help of Professor Benjamin Silliman, the celebrated scientist. A singularly successful art exhibition held in 1858 under the direction of the College Librarian, Daniel Coit Gilman, led to the establishment of an art school in 1864, through the generosity of Augustus Russell Street, a native of New Haven and graduate of Yale’s Class of 1812. This new educational program was placed in the hands of an art council, one of whose members was the painter-inventor Samuel F. B. Morse, a graduate of Yale College. When the Yale School of the Fine Arts opened in 1869, it was the first art school connected with an institution of higher learning in the country, and classes in drawing, painting, sculpture, and art history were inaugurated. The art collections in the old Trumbull Gallery were moved into a building endowed by Augustus Street and so named Street Hall, and were greatly augmented by the acquisition of the Jarves Collection of early Italian paintings in 1871.

Architectural instruction was begun in 1908 and was established as a department in 1916 with Everett Victor Meeks at its head. Drama, under the direction of George Pierce Baker and with its own separate building, was added in 1925 and continued to function as a department of the School until it became an independent school in 1955. In 1928 a new art gallery was opened, built by Egerton Swartwout and funded through the generosity of Edward S. Harkness. It was connected to Street Hall by a bridge above High Street, and Street Hall was used for instruction in art. The program in architecture was moved to Weir Hall, designed by George Douglas Miller. A large addition to the Art Gallery, designed by Louis I. Kahn in collaboration with Douglas Orr, and funded by the family of James Alexander Campbell and other friends of the arts at Yale, was opened in 1953. Several ﬂoors were used by the School until the rapidly expanding Gallery collections required their use. In 1959 the School of Art and Architecture was made a fully graduate professional school. In 1963 the Art and Architecture Building, designed by Paul Rudolph, was opened, funded by many friends of the arts at Yale under the chairmanship of Ward Cheney. In 1969 the School was constituted as two faculties, each with its own dean; and in 1972 two separate schools were established by the President and Fellows, the School of Art and the School of Architecture, which until 2000 shared the Rudolph building (now Rudolph Hall) for most of their activities. Sculpture was housed at 14 Mansfield Street in Hammond Hall (a large building formerly used for mechanical engineering), graphic design was located at 212 York Street (an old Yale fraternity building), and at 215 Park Street there were classrooms and additional graduate painting studios. Street Hall was assigned to the University Department of the History of Art. The arts at Yale—architecture, art, the Art Gallery, the Center for British Art, the history of art, the School of Drama, and the Repertory Theatre—thus occupied a group of buildings stretching along and near Chapel Street for almost three blocks.

It had long been the University’s plan to extend the Arts Area schools farther up Chapel Street. The first major new construction under this plan was the renovation of 1156 Chapel Street with the addition of an adjoining building at 353 Crown Street, designed by Deborah Berke, which opened in September 2000. A generous gift by Yale College graduate Holcombe T. Green, Jr., for whom the building is named, and a major contribution by Marion Rand in memory of her husband, Paul Rand, professor of graphic design, made this new complex possible. The new art buildings house an experimental theater for the School of Drama and all departments of the School of Art except sculpture. In 2009 sculpture moved from Hammond Hall, where it was housed from 1973 to 2008, to a new building in the Arts Area at 36 Edgewood Avenue adjacent to a new School of Art gallery at 32 Edgewood Avenue, both designed by Kieran Timberlake.

The Department of Art is committed to a professional art training within the context of a liberal arts university. Visual artists are responsible for some of the most provocative and enduring expressions of culture. At UCLA, emerging artists are provided with the tools they need to express themselves in ways that are meaningful in the social context in which they live and work.

The department attracts gifted and motivated students who thrive in an environment that encourages autonomy. They are drawn not only to the outstanding creative faculty, the University's resources, and its location in one of the world's leading art centers, but also to a program that encourages them to develop as artists. The result is a distinguished list of graduates who have made significant contributions in their field.

Undergraduate Studies (BA, Art)

The Department of Art is committed to professional art training within the context of a research university. Headed by a faculty of internationally recognized artists and theoreticians and complemented by a roster of distinguished visiting lecturers, the department provides a strong grounding in the principal art traditions and in the visual language of contemporary studio practice.

The department provides students with a broad exposure to the arts and encourages new fields of investigation. Students work in more than one medium and explore mixed media possibilities as well. Through the program, students can discover the best way – painting, video, photography, sculpture, ceramics, etc. – to express their ideas.

Students drawn to this department are interested in developing and refining their approach to the making and doing of art. The intent of the program is to provide the framework, both through coursework and independent study, to assist each student in the development of his or her own body of work.

The department offers courses in painting and drawing, photography, sculpture, ceramics, art theory, and new genres (including performance art, video, installation, and nonstudio work).

All majors are required to take foundation courses in the areas listed above, followed by more advanced courses selected from these areas. Typically, studio courses have a limited enrollment of approximately 17 students per section in order to provide ample interaction between students and faculty. Please refer to links below for a complete list of Department, School, and University degree requirements.

The program also stresses the integration of studio work with an inquiry into historical and scholarly aspects of the visual arts. This interchange allows for a dynamic dialogue between faculty and students and provides a context in which students can gain a deeper understanding of the arts today.

The faculty is composed of leading professional artists who have exhibited internationally as well as in important galleries and museums in Los Angeles and New York. The faculty share a passion for teaching as well as for preparing and encouraging future generations of artists.

Museums associated with UCLA offer students the opportunity to participate in innovative interdisciplinary programs and view exhibitions throughout the year. In addition, there are opportunities for students to exhibit their work, highlighted by the Undergraduate Juried Exhibition at the New Wight Gallery.

Graduate Studies

Headed by a faculty of internationally recognized artists and complemented by a roster of distinguished visiting lecturers, the Department of Art at UCLA is committed to professional art training within the context of a great liberal arts university. Within each area of specialization, encouragement is given to explore a wide range of media. Students choose from a diverse group of electives and can take classes in other departments within and outside the School of the Arts and Architecture. Regular interaction between the studio and the classroom creates a close-knit intellectual community that furthers critical thinking and creative growth.

All of the department's courses aim to instill an understanding of and appreciation for the visual arts and their contributions to the history of cultural development and change. Current critical and theoretical thought is the focus of the Seminar in Art (Art C280), and a wide range of contemporary issues is addressed in the Visiting Artists Lecture Series. The low faculty-student ratio facilitates regular one-on-one instruction. In addition, group critique and peer review are integral components of the program.

The department attracts gifted and motivated students who thrive in an environment that encourages autonomy. They are drawn not only to the outstanding creative faculty, the University's resources, and its location in one of the world's leading art centers, but also to a program that encourages them to develop as artists in ways that are meaningful in the social context in which they live and work. The result is a distinguished alumni roster including artists who have made significant contributions in their fields.

Master of Fine Arts (MFA)

The MFA program offers six areas of specialization: Ceramics, Interdisciplinary Studio, New Genres, Painting and Drawing, Photography, and Sculpture. These studio areas are supplemented by seminars and lectures in contemporary critical theory. The program emphasizes the development of a sustained artistic practice through exploration, experimentation, and intensive studio work and study. Opportunities to investigate areas beyond one's concentration are made available.

Maximum time is allowed for independent studio work, enabling students to work with up to three faculty members each quarter on an individual basis. Reviews of graduate work in the winter and spring quarters serve as a forum for critique and discussion with the entire faculty. The MFA degree normally requires two to three years of residency and culminates in a graduate exhibition.

MFA Course Overview

The MFA degree requires a minimum of 72 quarter units of coursework, which typically takes six to nine quarters to complete. Students complete a minimum of 24 of the 72 required units in their field of specialization. Required courses include graduate level studio courses, Graduate Group Critique (276), and the Seminar in Art (C280). A minimum of 12 quarter units of art history and an additional 28 quarter units of art history, or history, theory and criticism coursework offered by related departments in undergraduate and/or graduate studies are also required (including Art C280). Art history, theory or criticism courses completed at the undergraduate level may be applied toward the "art history" requirement, but may not be applied toward the 72 units required for the graduate degree. Students with few or no art history courses in undergraduate study may take upper division or graduate coursework at UCLA as electives to be counted toward the 40-unit "art history" requirement and toward the total units required for the degree. Subjects related to the special interests of the student may be substituted by petition.

In addition to the completion of required coursework, each degree is awarded on the basis of the quality of the student's work as demonstrated in the exhibition which is part of the comprehensive examination. The examination, administered by a faculty committee, includes a review of work completed for the formal exhibition, a document of vita, photo records of works, and a statement of the artist. The document is retained as property of the University.

For course information, please consult the UCLA General Catalog. For a complete outline of degree requirements, see Program Requirements for UCLA Graduate Degrees on the Graduate Division Web site at www.grad.ucla.edu.

We’re ranked first in the country as a public university art school — and fourth in the country overall. That means you’ll graduate with credibility as an artist and a professional, with a degree that’s respected in the world of galleries, design and advertising firms, graduate schools, artistic directors and employers.

We believe that when shopping for an art school, it’s imperative to know which are accredited and by whom. VCUarts is fully accredited.

Accreditation ensures that academic programs provided by institutions of higher education meet acceptable levels of quality. Accrediting associations develop rigorous evaluation criteria and conduct peer reviews on a regular basis.

VCU School of the Arts is accredited by:

• National Association of Schools of Art and Design
• National Association of Schools of Dance
• National Association of Schools of Music
• National Association of Schools of Theatre
• Virginia Department of Education
• Council for Interior Design Accreditation
• National Council for Accreditation for Teacher Education
• Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges

The VCUarts Department of Painting + Printmaking is a vibrant community of artists, scholars, and students — informed by a practice of studio work and research with strong emphasis in critical and creative thinking. The department is large and diverse, with academic programming designed to impart intelligence and build student’s confidence in their discipline.

To artists working in this century, engaging in our academic studio program in painting + printmaking is akin to entering a workman-like laboratory to investigate and re-define visual culture. We welcome you to join us — to bring your intelligence, ambition, and can-do discipline — as we examine our historical precedents, and challenge the future of studio practice.

The Graphic Design Program offers a 122-credit Bachelor of Fine Arts degree in Graphic Design. After completing the Art Foundation Program, students take courses in Publication and Print Design, Sequential and Motion Design, and Interaction Design along with a series of related Studio and Seminar courses.

The primary goal of the curriculum is to educate students to be capable of integrating form and information for the purposes of effective visual communication.

The Department of Graphic Design encourages the exploration of diverse problem-solving methodologies, innovative investigations and creative research in all forms of communication. It is dedicated to excellence in teaching, scholarship, research and professional practice.

The Department provides both an undergraduate and graduate education stressing critical creative and intellectual thinking; awareness of individual, social and cultural issues; the integration of a range of technologies; and a concern for ethical development.

The program actively contributes to the school, university, local, state, national and international communities through its scholarly and creative activities, educational programs and service efforts.

Our department aims to facilitate a comprehensive artistic, technical and intellectual understanding and use of the mediums of photography and film; to provide a rigorous education in the arts, specifically in photographic and moving image media, and a broad education in other academic subjects; to foster a climate that inspires creativity, intellectual curiosity, freedom of expression, and critical thinking.   We emphasize hands-on experience in the fields of fine art, studio and location photography, and narrative, documentary and experimental filmmaking and sponsor a wide variety of guest lectures, seminars and workshops.  All students become adept in chemical based processes and the latest digital technologies.

INTERNSHIPS, RESEARCH GRANTS AND TRAVEL OPPORTUNITIES

Students take many internships that have included advertising and branding firms like the Martin Agency and the Frontier Projects ;  publishing companies  line Time Inc and The National Geographic , television channels like Discovery, museums like the VMFA and MASS Moca, and many art galleries, commercial photographers, videographers and production companies.  Each year many of our students are awarded  School of Arts Undergraduate Student Research Grants which encourages interdisciplinary work within the whole University. The School of Arts offers International Travel Grants, which many Photo and Film students attain every year. We have a direct exchange program with Edinburgh Napier University in Scotland.

ADMISSION CRITERIA AND DEGREE REQUIREMENTS

Admission criteria

Students seeking admission to the Bachelor of Fine Arts in Photography and Film degree program apply to the School of the Arts and enter the Art Foundation Program. During the final semester of the Art Foundation Program, students submit a portfolio application that is reviewed by the Department of Photography and Film.

Degree requirements

Completion of the program requires a minimum of 120 credits. Forty-five credits must be completed in 300-, 400- and/or 500-level courses. The final 30 credits must be completed at VCU. Students are strongly encouraged to meet with an adviser each semester to maintain the correct curriculum track toward graduation.

For full application consideration, students must complete each course requirement of the Art Foundation Program with a minimum grade of C and have a minimum cumulative GPA of 2.0. While in the program students must earn a minimum grade of C in each departmental course and maintain a minimum cumulative GPA of 2.0. Students who fail to meet these requirements may be dropped from the program.

The BFA program in Sculpture + Extended Media offers a fluid and dynamic educational experience that reflects the vital landscape of art making today. Our program is initiated with a progressive cycle of classes, originating with manual and intellectual skill development, and arcing toward the ultimate goal of developing a complex, nuanced and individual approach to art upon graduation. A day-to-day, experimental, and process-orientated studio ethic is encouraged. Fundamental questions of “why,” whether personal, philosophical or conceptual in nature, are buttressed by hands-on strategies facilitating “how.” Using this approach, students flourish in an environment of personal agency and growth, where challenges are celebrated, skill-development encouraged, and conversations open new paths forward.

Even as Sculpture + Extended Media fosters an open and speculative approach to what sculpture can be and do, it is also an intensely useful and practical way of thinking. This is evidenced not just in the transferable skill-sets that develop, but also in the conceptual exploration of materials, objects, images, actions, ecologies, events and politics. In this way, Sculpture + Extended Media occupies a crucial position in between disciplines and areas of thought. Our program culminates by providing students the tools needed to become active participants in the dialogues of our time.

About the School of Art at Carnegie Mellon
The School of Art is a premier location for the interface between art and technology and for interdisciplinary art practice.

The art degree programs and environment are designed to develop individuals capable of working as artists in a complex, rapidly changing global culture. Connections with other CMU departments and research units enhance the creative and academic opportunities available to art students.

Art faculty, all practicing artists or scholars, provide an intense, professional learning environment where students enjoy close ties with their instructors and each other.

Students, faculty and staff contribute regularly to CMU and Pittsburgh's creative communities. Places to see and exhibit art on campus, throughout the city and surrounding neighborhoods are varied and plentiful.

The School of Art:

• Combines the advantages of a renowned studio program with the interdisciplinary resources of a top tier university.
• Offers breadth and depth through an inclusive approach toward educating artists.
• Encourages experimentation, crossing boundaries, and hybrid processes as well as engaging the history and traditions of art.
• Fosters problem solving skills and the ability to work creatively in a complex, rapidly changing global culture.
• Provides versatile training from a professionally active faculty who focus on students as individuals.
• Provides 24-hour access to state-of-the-art facilities in a safe, supportive environment.
• Ensures broad and balanced exposure to a wide range of media, embracing new and established technologies.
• Engages intentionally with local and international communities through courses, events, internships, and study abroad.
• Cultivates and celebrates diversity in educating artists for the future.
• Contributes to a city and region with countless cultural and recreational opportunities.
• Offers career guidance preparing alumni to negotiate their way successfully in the world with creativity and intelligence.

Educational mission:

To provide an environment for learning and creating, which develops in the individual student the knowledge, skills and commitment necessary to work as an artist in society.

Artistic Mission:

To expand the multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary practice of art by striving to inform it with knowledge from the culture-at-large; and to cultivate a broad-spectrum approach to artistic possibilities, which respects tradition and encourages innovation.

Social Mission:

To provide the world with diverse, inquisitive and informed artists who use artmaking in a variety of ways to create a meaningful relationship with society, which sustains the relevance of art locally, nationally, and internationally.

The School of Art's Artistic and Teaching Philosophy:

• Considers, in practical and visionary terms, the role of art and the artist in society.
• Encourages experimentation, crossing boundaries, and hybrid processes as well as engaging the history and traditions of art.
• Combines the advantages of a renowned and innovative professional studio program with the interdisciplinary resources of a top tier university.
• Offers an expansive and inclusive approach toward educating artists, embracing new and established technologies in material and virtual realms.
• Provides extensive training and state-of-the-art facilities in a supportive environment with a professionally active faculty who focus on students as individuals.
• Engages with local and international communities through events, courses, internships, and study abroad.
• Resides in and contributes to a city and region with countless cultural and recreational opportunities.
• Cultivates and celebrates diversity in educating artists for the future.
• Shares and promotes the accomplishments of faculty, students, alumni and guests as they contribute to our culture with creativity and intelligence.

Upon graduating from Carnegie Mellon School of Art, students will be able to:

• Demonstrate creativity, experimentation and invention in the development and realization of artwork
• Utilize technical skills appropriate to their chosen discipline• medium or media
• Apply quantitative, critical and analytical reasoning in relation to processes, materials and forms
• Conduct and apply critical and contextual research in terms of historical and contemporary theoretical, social and cultural issues
• Effectively communicate in visual, written and oral forms
• Employ professional and organizational skills to work independently or collaboratively within a specific discipline or in an interdisciplinary context

The Visual Arts Program attracts emerging artists of unusual promise from around the world. They join a vigorous community, working alongside an exceptional faculty at a world-renowned research institution in New York City, the center of the art world.

Contemporary art has become increasingly interdisciplinary. To that end, the Visual Arts Program offers an MFA degree in Visual Arts rather than in one specific medium. The two-year studio program, taught by internationally celebrated artists, allows students to pursue digital media, drawing, painting, photography, printmaking, sculpture, installation, performance and video art.

The Visual Arts Program offers students many opportunities to expand the depth and complexity of their studio practice as well as their ability to think critically in the context of contemporary art theory. To that end, students have regular studio visits by full and adjunct faculty members, who offer critical insight into the form of, and underlying ideas behind, their work.

Students are also encouraged to take electives outside of the Visual Arts Program: in the Writing, Theatre Arts, and Film programs of the School of the Arts; and in art history, architecture, philosophy and other areas of study throughout Columbia University. These electives ensure that students develop a broad base of art history and theory upon which they can build a solid and provocative studio practice.

Course Descriptions

Graduate Studio
Every Monday evening students have one 40-minute studio visit with full time faculty or other special graduate adjunct faculty. Students usually see each faculty member twice per semester.

Visiting Critic
Each semester the program invites 10-12 visiting artists and critics to do studio visits. Students submit requests for visits, and will see 2 or 3 visiting artists and critics over the semester.

Visiting Artist Lecture Series (VALS)
VALS is organized by a small team of second year MFA students. The VALS coordinators are responsible for soliciting a wish-list of visiting artists from students in the program. The coordinators then arrange a full program of artists’ lectures for Tuesday evenings. Recent presenters include Marina Abramovic, Amanda Alfieri, David Altmejd, Ayreen Anastas, Lothar Baumgarten, Gina Beavers, Zoe Beloff, Jonathon Berger, Sebastian Black, Daniel Bozhkov, Matthew Brannon, Kerstin Bratsch, Connie Butler, David Byrne, Paul Chan, Cora Cohen, Trisha Donnelly, Nicole Eisenman, Okwui Enwezor, Omer Fast, Rochelle Feinstein, Coco Fusco, Rene Gabri, Chitra Ganesh, Lia Gangitano, Andrea Geyer, Paul Graham, Amy Granat, Nicolas Guagnini, Fritz Haeg, Sharon Hayes, Nancy Holt, Alex Hubbard, Anthony Huberman, Pierre Huyghe, Tim Hyde, Arthur Jafa, Joan Jonas, Ella Kruglyanskaya, Michelle Kuo, Elad Lassry, Jose Lerma, Sam Lewitt, Justin Lieberman, Glenn Ligon, Kalup Linzy, Sharon Lockhart, Charles Long, Mary Ellen Mark, Nick Mauss, Keith Mayerson, Josiah McElheny, Shana Moulton, Laura Mulvey, Laurel Nakadate, Molly Nesbit, Bob Nickas, Yoko Ono, Gabriel Orozco, Trevor Paglen, Mai-Thu Perret, Lari Pittman, Genesis P-Orridge, Yvonne Rainer, Scott Rothkopf, Mika Rottenberg, Tom Sachs, Aki Sasamoto, Jacolby Satterwhite, Pieter Schoolwerth, Taryn Simon, Alexandre Singh, Michael Smith, A.L. Steiner, Amber Hawk Swanson, Mika Tajima, Cheyney Thompson, Wolfgang Tillmans, Nicola Tyson, Nick van Woert, Philippe Vergne, Charline Von Heyl, Antek Walczak, Kelley Walker, Jordan Wolfson, and Andrea Zittel.

Critical Issues
Critical Issues is intended as a stimulus to art-making and helps to form the critical and conceptual foundation for students to bring to their studio practice. In the fall, Critical Issues is a lecture series where professors from across the University present on their specialization. In the spring, Critical Issues is a seminar with weekly readings and other required assignments.  Recent lecturers include Alex Alberro, Arnold Aronson, Carol Becker, David Carrier, Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, Jonathan Crary, Wade Davis, Aaron Fox, Jane Gaines, Elizabeth Grosz, Siri Hustvedt, Tom Kalin, Laura Kurgan, Reinhold Martin, John Pemberton, Dr Oliver Sacks, Mira Schor, Kaja Silverman, Jovana Stokic, Michael Taussig, Mark Taylor, and Lance Weiler.

Group Critique
Students meet in small groups of 6-8 students with an instructor for three consecutive Wednesdays. Over the three week sequence each student has a critique with the group.

Electives
Students may choose courses from anywhere in the University, subject to the course’s registration requirements. Students are required to take four elective courses total, or one elective each semester.

Mentor Program
Each student is assigned to two mentor groups which meet every semester. Groups are usually 10-12 students. Mentors schedule individual studio visits, group visits, lectures, field trips, workshops, etc. for one full week of the semester.  Current mentors include A.K. Burns, Mark Dion, David Humphrey, Michael Joo, Josiah McElheny, Matthew Ritchie, and Rona Yefman.

The Herman and Eve Gelman Studio Visit Series
In this ongoing program supported by a generous grant, celebrated New York artists open their studios to a small group of graduate students to observe and discuss works-in-progress. Past participants have included Vince Aletti, Mamma Andersson, Dave Arnold, Huma Bhabha, Elinor Carucci, Paul Chan, Luis Gispert, Barbara Hammer, David Hoey, Jacqueline Humphries, James Hyde, Robert Lazzarini, An-My Le, Robert Longo, Vera Lutter, Lorraine O’Grady, Gilles Peress, Cai Quoqiang, Patricia Sharon Chang, Michael Spano, Sara Vanderbeek, Stanley Whitney, Sasha Wolf and Lisa Yuskavage.

Public Exhibitions

First-Year Exhibition
The first year of study culminates in an exhibition that is curated by an outside curator and is mounted in the Miriam and Ira D. Wallach Gallery in Schermerhorn Hall. This exhibition begins to prepare the MFA candidates for the experience of the MFA Thesis Exhibition in the following year.

Open Studios
At the end of each fall semester, the second-year MFA candidates open their studios to the public and invited guests from the art community. Each student is present to discuss his or her work in an informal setting.

Thesis Project
The Thesis Project begins in the second year with a written proposal that delineates the student's artistic practice and outlines what he or she aims to accomplish for the Thesis Exhibition. A Thesis Committee, composed of full-time and adjunct faculty, is chosen by the student. The Thesis Exhibition opens in May and is curated by an outside curator.

Other Events

In addition to the events and programs described above, the Visual Arts Program offers other special one-time and recurring events designed to enhance the quality of the two-year experience for artists in the program. "Friday Sessions," organized as a tutorial/workshop, bring both technical information and other discussion topics to students in a casual setting.

Facilities

Graduate studios are located at Watson Hall, 612 West 115th Street, and Prentis Hall, 632 West 125th Street. Each graduate student is assigned a studio with 24-hour access. Watson Hall also houses a wood shop, a Digital Media Center, a large format printer and a seminar room. Prentis Hall has classrooms, a ceramics room, wood and metal shops and a Digital Media Center.  Black-and-white photography and printmaking facilities are in Dodge Hall.

The intent of our interdisciplinary program is to enable Visual Arts students to explore every conceivable form of visual expression. Students majoring in Visual Arts at Columbia University is provided with instruction in the tools and techniques necessary for the production of art while enhancing their creative, critical and analytic voice. Whether choosing to concentrate in Drawing, Painting, Sculpture, Photography, Printmaking or Video, or embracing an artistic practice that incorporates any combination of these disciplines, the emphasis is on developing a student's personal vision.

Our majors benefit from working under the guidance of a distinguished full-time and adjunct faculty, all of whom are active visual artists with national and international reputations. Some of the key components of our program include Seminar in Contemporary Art Practice, Senior Thesis, art studios for majors, Art History, and graduate student mentors. These hallmarks of our program introduce students to the various pertinent dialogues within contemporary art, provide them with individual or shared space to develop their own studio practice, engage in specific art historical studies, foster mentor relationships with candidates from our renowned MFA program and offer opportunities to exhibit their work in the final semester of Senior Thesis.

A Major in Visual Arts from Columbia will provide a comprehensive and expansive foundation for artists in pursuit of their MFA, an exciting career in the arts as well as all other fields requiring a flexible and creative outlook.

For more information, please visit the Columbia College Visual Arts Bulletin.

Welcome to Cranbrook Academy of Art and Art Museum. I’d like to be the first to say hello and welcome you to the website, which serves as a portal to the historic and beautiful 319-acre Cranbrook campus. As the first graduate of the Academy to be named Director, I’m both humbled and honored to be leading this fabled institution into the twenty-first century.

For more than 75 years, Cranbrook has been one of the nation’s leading graduate schools of art, architecture, and design. It has been home to some of the world’s most renowned designers and artists. Eero Saarinen, Charles Eames, Daniel Libeskind, Michael and Katherine McCoy, and Jun Kaneko have all taught here, to name only a few. Our students have included Florence Knoll, Harry Bertoia, Jack Lenor Larsen, Nick Cave, Tony Matelli, Niels Diffrient, Lorraine Wild, Andrew Blauvelt, and Hani Rashid. It’s arguable that the work emanating from Cranbrook in the twentieth century changed the way people live, and the way they understand art and design. The New York Times has said that “the effect of Cranbrook and its graduates and faculty on the physical environment of this country has been profound…Cranbrook, surely more than any other institution, has a right to think of itself as synonymous with contemporary American design.”

The Academy is very unique. We don’t have set curricula, required classes, or prerequisites. We don’t have undergraduates. Most graduate schools offer a program that grows out of their undergraduate model. We offer something entirely different: a graduate-only program designed specifically to support individual exploration and mentoring. In addition, the Academy remains, per capita, the highest producer of student Fulbright scholars in the United States. The Academy also continues to be named one of the Fulbright program’s “Top Producing Institutions” by the Institute for International Education.

At Cranbrook, not only do our ten Artists-in-Residence determine how their programs are run, they work individually with students to determine their course of study. That study is always centered on a rigorous studio-based practice of making, informed by intensive and regular critique, and the opportunity to observe and work with leading practitioners in their own studio environments.

The Academy also has a world-class museum devoted exclusively to modern and contemporary art, architecture, and design. Cranbrook Art Museum was established in 1930 and opened in its current Eliel Saarinen-designed building in 1942. In an exciting new addition, the Museum underwent a $22 million restoration and expansion in 2011 and created a state-of-the-art Collections Wing that makes its entire collection visible—and accessible—to students, scholars, and visitors. The Cranbrook Archives and the offices of the Cranbrook Center for Collections and Research also are located within the Art Museum.

Visitors to the Museum experience a diverse program of exhibitions and events and a wide array of lectures, performances, and workshops for all ages. We highlight a broad spectrum of artists, architects, and designers from all corners of the globe and are a leading destination for those visiting Detroit who seek adventurous new art. Indeed, the museum is a place for discovery.

I am a staunch supporter of new art and new ideas, and encourage debate, exchange, and collaboration within and beyond the Cranbrook campus. As Director, I look forward to forging a future that builds upon the international reputation and history of innovation that has made Cranbrook one of the world’s leading centers for artistic excellence.

The integration of life and work

The architectural master plan conceived by Eliel Saarinen envisioned an Academy where the Artists-in-Residence, their families, and the students would live and work in close proximity. This structure is unique to Cranbrook. Life and work shift seamlessly into one another; dinners with visiting artists become epicenters of critical discussion, critiques extend the studio into the surrounding woods, early morning walks with colleagues become brainstorming sessions. The intimacy of the residential campus cannot be overstated. The dormitories, late-nights in the studios, the homes of each Artist-in-Residence, parties in Cranbrook Art Museum surrounded by fountains and gardens, and hiking trails around Kingswood Lake all create the fabric of a full-time Academy where the physical community matches the intellectual one.

Welcome to the School of Art and Design at Alfred University!

The programs of Alfred University’s School of Art and Design have been consistently ranked among the top art and design programs both in the United States and internationally. Students participate in a curriculum that provides a true multi-disciplinary environment for creative and scholarly research in art with a visionary focus on “high touch, high tech”.

Our faculty members are dedicated teachers who focus on the individual development of each student. They are also renowned artists and scholars who actively exhibit and publish their work.

The School of Art and Design looks to the future with an active engagement in the continuity of innovation and excellence that has defined its history. The creative energy of the School is centered on the vigorous ambitions of its students and the dedication of its faculty. This community of inspired artists and scholars is what makes the School of Art and Design an ideal place to learn about art and the creative process.

History
The School of Art and Design has an uncommon and celebrated history of engaging in the interface of art, science and technology. Joining the School of Engineering, the School of Art and Design dates back to 1900, when the New York State School of Clay-Working and Ceramics was established by an act of the legislature. This ultimately developed into the New York State College of Ceramics at Alfred University. Today, with 36 full-time faculty, 18 adjunct faculty, 14 technical and research specialists, and four administrative staff members, the School of Art and Design serves over 530 students majoring in art plus many additional undergraduates throughout Alfred University.

Programs
The School’s programs exist within the Divisions of Foundations; Ceramic Art; Drawing, Painting and Photography; Expanded Media; Sculpture/Dimensional Studies; and Art History and include graduate studies in Ceramic Art; Electronic Integrated Arts; and Sculpture/Dimensional Studies. The degrees offered include the Bachelor of Fine Arts (BFA), the Bachelor of Science in Art History and Theory (BS), and the Master of Fine Arts (MFA).

Galleries and facilities
Students in art and design engage in a uniquely rigorous program of study developed to encourage innovation and creativity in the making and thinking about art. Distinguished galleries and facilities include the Samuel R. Scholes Library, the Institute for Electronic Arts, the Alfred Ceramic Art Museum, the Fosdick-Nelson Gallery, the Cohen Art Center and Gallery, the Robert C. Turner Gallery, the National Casting Center, and the Paul Vickers Gardner Glass Center support the School’s programs.

The School of Art and Design offers a four-year, professional degree program leading to the Bachelor of Fine Arts (BFA) degree. The unique curriculum, which incorporates a specialized approach for each of the academic years of study, is recognized for its innovation in emphasizing disciplinary depth and interdisciplinary opportunities. Students work in state-of-the-art facilities and are provided with individual studios in their senior year.

Studies in art and design are enhanced by the rich course offerings through the College of Liberal Arts & Sciences, the College of Professional Studies, and the Inamori School of Engineering.

Foundations (Freshman Year)
Foundations is a first-year course predicated on generating a rigorous studio practice through comprehensive teaching philosophy that engages a broad range of questions, extending across and beyond artistic disciplines. Individual students bring their own experiences and skills into a community of peers. Drawing is a key component of the Foundations curriculum.

In addition to the Foundations studio courses in the first year, students complete 6 credits of art history by taking three 2-credit courses in non-western art, ancient to baroque art, and modern to contemporary art. First-year students also fulfill academic requirements in writing and humanities.

Sophomore Year
The sophomore curriculum is designed to enhance and further develop the studio experience of the Foundations year with the introduction to specific studio areas, all of which support the "high tech, high touch" vision of the School. The curriculum encourages study of studio disciplines represented across each of four Divisions - Ceramic Art; Expanded Media; Painting, Drawing and Photography; and Sculpture/Dimensional Studies. Drawing is a key component of the sophomore and junior year curriculum.

Sophomore students learn fundamental skills necessary in the development of an artistic practice. These include an awareness and ability to understand, use and integrate processes, tools, materials, and vocabularies. During this year students choose four studios, one from each division, or opt to take four studios in three divisions. This allows those who want to focus in a specific medium to do so, while allowing others a more varied studio experience. Both options are meant to prepare students for the challenges of the junior and senior curriculum.

The sophomore art history requirement, Issues and Debates in Contemporary Art, provides a stimulating and integrated context to the studio experience. Students also extend the breath of their academic experience by choosing elective courses from other schools and colleges at Alfred University.

Junior Year
Students entering the junior year have the latitude to define their interests and creative goals. Students naturally become more focused, integrating conceptual and technical skills while developing a personal vision in their art making. At the junior level, academic and elective course work fosters interest in cross-disciplinary practice and undergraduate research possibilities.

The junior year is also the time for students to take advantage of study abroad opportunities. The School of Art & Design has several exchange programs including agreements with the University for the Creative Arts at Farnham, England, Edinburgh College of Art in Scotland, Fachhochschule Koblenz University of Applied Sciences in Germany, the Central Academy of Fine Art in Beijing, China, and Sydney College of the Arts and the University of New South Wales in Australia. The Drawing, Painting and Photography Division offers a summer program through the Santa Reparata International School of Art in Florence, Italy.

Senior Year
Seniors work semi-independently in their own studio spaces, and are required to meet weekly with two faculty advisors (instructors) to discuss their work, research and process. Additionally, seniors participate in seminars, visiting artists programs, group critiques, discussions, and exhibitions. Defining their own direction, seniors develop and produce a consistent body of work, which draws on their individual experiences, acquired skills and personal vision. The culmination of the BFA degree is the senior thesis exhibition.

During the final two weeks of the academic year, the School of Art and Design is transformed into quality exhibition space where graduating seniors display their thesis work. The opening celebration of Senior Shows includes families and numerous guests from throughout Western New York State. Following the openings, students come back into their exhibition spaces for final reviews and faculty critiques. The momentum gained during the senior year prepares graduates to enter the work force as highly accomplished and motivated artists and designers.
Let the Problem of the Mind Dissolve in Your Mind
This is an exercise in fictional science, or science fiction, if you like that better. Not for amusement: science fiction in the      vice of science. Or just science, if you agree that fiction is part of it, always was, and always will be as long as our brains are only minuscule fragments of the universe, much too small to hold all the facts of the world but not too idle to speculate about them.
I have been dealing for many years with certain structures within animal brains that seemed to be interpretable as pieces of comput- ing machinery because of their simplicity and/or regularity. Much of this work is only interesting if you are yourself involved in it. At times, though, in the back of my mind, while I was counting fibers in the visual ganglia of the fly or synapses in the cerebral cortex of the mouse, I felt knots untie, distinctions dissolve, difficulties disap- pear, difficulties I had experienced much earlier when I still held my first naive philosophical approach to the problem of the mind. This process of purification has been, over the years, a delightful experi- ence. The text I want you to read is designed to convey some of this
2. I VEHICLES
to you, if you are prepared to follow me not through a world ofreal brains but through a toy world that we will create together.
We will talk only about machines with very simple internal struc- .tures, too simple in fact to be interesting from the point of view of mechanical or electrical engineering. Interest arises, rather, when we look at these machines or vehicles as if they were animals in a naniral environment. We will be tempted, then, to use psychologi- cal language in describing their behavior. And yet we know very
well that there is nothing in these vehicles that we have not put in ourselves. This will be an interesting educational game.
Our vehicles may move in water by jet propulsion. Or you may prefer to imagine them moving somewhere between galaxies, with negligible gravitational pull. Remember, however, that their jets must expel matter in order to function at all, and this implies re- plenishment of the food stores within the vehicles, which might be a
problem between galaxies. This suggests vehicles moving on the surface of the earth through an agricultural landscape where they have good support and can easily find the food or fuel they need. (Indeed the first few chapters here conjure up images of vehicles swimming around in the water, while later what comes to mind are little carts moving on hard surfaces. This is no accident, if the
evolution of vehicles 1 to 14 in any way reflects the evolution of
animal species.)
It does not matter. Get used to a way of thinking in which the
hardware of the realization of an idea is much less important than the idea itself. Norbert Wiener was emphatic about this when he formulated the title of his famous book: Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in Animals and Machines.
Vehicle 1
Getting Around
Vehicle 1 is equipped with one sensor and one motor (figure 1). The connection is a very simple one. The more there is of the quality to which the sensor is tuned, the faster the motor goes. Let the quality be temperature and let the force exerted by the motor be exactly proportionate to the absolute temperature (the temperature above zero degrees Kelvin) measured by the sensor. The vehicle will move, wherever it is (the absolute temperature is nowhere equal to zero), in the direction in which it happens to be pointing. It will slow down in cold regions and speed up where it is warm.
Here we have introduced a bit of Aristotelian physics. Aristotle, like everybody else between this ancient Greek philosopher and the less ancient Italian physicist Galileo, thought that the speed of a moving body is proportionate to the force that drives it. This is true in most instances, namely when there is friction to slow down the vehicle. Normally friction will see to it that the velocity becomes zero in the absence of any force, that it will stay at a certain small value for a certain small force, at a higher value for a higher force,
and so forth.
Of course, as you all know, this is not true for heavenly bodies
Figurer
Vehicle 1 , the simplest vehicle. The speed of the motor (rectangular box at
the tail end) is controlled by a sensor (half circle on a stalk, at the front
end). ·Motion is always forward, in the direction of the arrow, except for perturbations.
I
(especially if you don't invest astronomical time in observing them). Their velocity is a complicated result of all the forces that ever hit them. This is another reason for letting our vehicles move in       or on the surface of the earth rather than in outer space.
In this Aristotelian world our vehicle number 1 may even come to rest. This will happen when it enters a cold region where the force exerted by its motor, being proportionate to the temperature, becomes smaller than the frictional force.
Once you let friction come into the picture, other amazing things may happen. In outer space Vehicle r would move on a straight course with varying speed (the gravitational pull of neighboring galaxies averages out to nothing). Not so on earth. The friction, which is nothing but the sum of all the microscopic forces that arise in a situation too messy to be analyzed in detail, may not be quite symmetrical. As the vehicle pushes forward against frictional forces, it will deviate from its course. In the long run it will be seen to move in a complicated trajectory, curving one way or the other without apparent good reason. If it is very small, its motion will be quite erratic, similar to "Brownian motion," only with a certain drive added.
Imagine, now, what you would think if you saw such a vehicle swimming around in a pond. It is restless, you would say, and does not like warm water. But it is quite stupid, since it is not able to turn back to the nice cold spot it overshot in its restlessness. Anyway, you would say, it is ALIVE, since you have never seen a particle of dead matter move around quite like that.
5 I Getting Around
Vehicle 2
Fear and Aggression
Vehicle 2 is generally similar to Vehicle 1 except that it has two sensors, one on each side, and two motors, right and left (figure 2). You may think of it as being a descendant of Vehicle 1 through some incomplete process of biological reduplication: two of the earlier brand stuck together side by side. Again, the more the sensors are excited, the faster the motors run.
Of course you notice right away that we can make three kinds of such vehicles, depending on whether we connect (a) each sensor to the motor on the same side, (b) each sensor to the motor on the opposite side, or (c) both sensors to both motors. We can im- mediately dismiss case (c), for this is nothing but a somewhat more luxurious version of Vehicle 1 . The difference between (a) and (b), however, is very interesting.
Consider (a) first. This vehicle will spend more time in the places where there is less of the stuff that excites its sensors and will speed up when it is exposed to higher concentrations. If the source of the stuff (say, light in the case of light sensors) is directly ahead, the vehicle may hit the source unless it is deflected from its course. If the source is to one side (figure 3), one of the.sensors, the one nearer to the source, is excited more than the other. The corresponding
ac
Figure 2
Vehicle 2., with two motors and two sensors; otherwise like Vehicle 1 . The connections differ in a, b, and c.
a
b
' '
I I"_
/ I I \ ' ' ........ '
\
\'
\ \
motor will work harder. And as a consequence the vehicle will turn away from the source.
Now let us try the other scheme of sensory-motor              (b) in figure 3. No change if the source is straight ahead. If it is to one side, however, we notice a difference with respect to Vehicle 2a. Vehicle 2b will turn toward the source and eventually hit it. There is no escaping: as long as 2b stays in the vicinity of the source, no matter how it stumbles and hesitates, it will hit the source frontally in the end. Only in the unlikely case that a strong perturbation in its course makes it turn exactly away from the source, and no further perturbation occurs, can it escape its fate.
Let Vehicles 2a and 2b move around in their world for a while and watch them. Their characters are quite opposite. Both DISLIKE sources. But 2a becomes restless in their vicinity and tends to avoid them, escaping until it safely reaches a place where the influence of the source is scarcely felt. Vehicle 2a is a COWARD, you would say. Not so Vehicle 2b. It, too, is excited by the presence of sources, but resolutely turns toward them and hits them with high velocity, as if it wanted to destroy them. Vehicle 2b is AGGRESSIVE, obviously.
Figure 3
Vehicles 2a and 2b in the vicinity of a source (circle with rays emanating from it). Vehicle 2b orients toward the source, 2a away from it.
\
I I
\
9 J Fear an<! Aggression
Vehicle 3
Love
The violence of Vehicle :z.b, no less than the cowardice of its companion :z.a, are traits that call for improvement. There is something very crude about a vehicle that can only be excited by the things it smells (or sees or feels or hears) and knows no soothing or relaxing stimuli. What comes to mind is to introduce some inhi- bition in the connections between the sensors and the motors, switching the sign of the influence from positive to negative. This will let the motor slow down when the corresponding sensor is activated. Again we can make two variants, one with straight and one with crossed connections (figure 4). Both will slow down in the presence of a strong stimulus and race where the stimulus is weak. They will therefore spend more time in the vicinity of the source than away fro_m it. They will actually come to rest in the immediate vicinity of the source.
But here we notice a difference between the vehicle with straight connections and the one with crossed connections. Approaching the source, the first (figure 4a) will orient toward it, since on an oblique course the sensor nearer to the source will slow down the motor on the same side, producing a turn. toward that side. The vehicle with straight connections will come to rest facing the
\
\
"
a
I '-:_ ,,.I I\'
Figure 4
Vehicle 3, with inhibitory influence of the sensors on the motors.
/
I
I
I
I2 I VEHICLE 3
source. The vehicle with crossed connections (figure 4b) for analo- gous reasons will come to rest facing away from the source and may not stay there very long, since a slight perturbation could cause it to drift away from the source. This would lessen the source's inhibitory influence, causing the vehicle to speed up more and more as it gets away.
You will have no difficulty giving names to this sort of behavior. These vehicles LIKE the source, you will say, but in different ways. Vehicle 3a LOVES it in a permanent way, staying close by in quiet admiration from the time it spots the source to all future time. Vehicle 3b, on the other hand, is an EXPLORER. It likes the nearby source all right, but keeps an eye open for other, perhaps stronger sources, which it will sail to, given a chance, in order to find a more permanent and gratifying appeasement.
But this is not yet the full development of Vehicle 3. We are now ready to make a more complete model using all the behavioral traits at our disposal. Call it Vehicle 3c. We give it not just one pair of sensors but four pairs, tuned to different qualities of the environ- ment, say light, temperature, oxygen concentration, and amount of organic matter (figure 5). Now we connect the first pair to the motors with uncrossed excitatory connections, as in Vehicle 2a, the second pair with crossed excitatory connections, as in Vehicle 2b, and the third and the fourth pairs with inhibitory connections, crossed and uncrossed, as in Vehicles 3b and 3a.
This is now ·a vehicle with really interesting behavior. It dislikes high temperature, turns away from hot places, and at the same time seems to dislike light bulbs with even greater passion, since it turns toward them and destroys them. On the other hand it definitely seems to prefer a well-oxygenated environment and one containing many organic molecules, since it spends much of its time in such places. But it is in the habit of moving elsewhere when the supply of either organic matter or (especially) oxygen   low. You cannot help admitting that Vehicle 3c has a system of VALUES, and, come to
Figure 5
A multisensorial vehicle of brand 3c.
I4 I VEHICLE 3
think of it, KNOWLEDGE, since some of the habits it has, like de- stroying light bulbs, may look quite knowledgeable, as if the vehicle knows that light bulbs tend to heat up the environment and conse- quen.tly make it uncomfortable to live in. It also looks as if it knows about the possibility of making energy out of oxygen and organic matter because it prefers places where these two commodities are available.
But, you will say, this is ridiculous: knowledge implies a flow of information from the environment into a living being or at least into something like a living being. There was no such transmission of information here. We were just playing with sensors, motors, and connections: the properties that happened to emerge may look like knowledge but really are not. We should be careful with such words.
You are right. We will explain in a later chapter (on Vehicle 6) how knowledge may enter a system of connections. And we will introduce an alternative way of incorporating knowledge into the system in our chapter on Vehicle 7. In any case, once knowledge is incorporated, the resulting vehicle may look and behave quite like our Vehicle 3c.
Meanwhile I invite you to consider the enormous wealth of dif- ferent properties that we may give Vehicle 3c by choosing various sensors and various combinations of crossed and uncrossed, excit- atory and inhibitory, connections.
If you consider the possibility of strong and weak influences from the sensors to the motors, you realize that the variety becomes even greater. The vehicle may not care much about light but care very much about temperature. Its sense of smell may be much keener for organic matter than it is for oxygen or vice versa. And there may be
. many more than just four pairs of sensors and four sensory qual-
. ities: the vehicles may be equipped with all sorts of shrewd de- tectors of energy and of chemicals. But this is best discussed in connection with a new idea incorporated in the vehicles of the next
chapter.